## Chapter 11. Events, Qualities, Quantities, And Other Vague Words: On Lojban Abstraction

<span id="ch-11"></span><span id="chapter-abstractions"></span><span id="chapter-abstractions-picture"></span>
<!-- figure: media/chapter-abstractions.gif -->

<span id="sec-11-1"></span><span id="section-syntax"></span>
### The syntax of abstraction

The purpose of the feature of Lojban known as _abstraction_ is to provide a means for taking whole bridi and packaging them up, as it were, into simple selbri. Syntactically, abstractions are very simple and uniform; semantically, they are rich and complex, with few features in common between one variety of abstraction and another. We will begin by discussing syntax without regard to semantics; as a result, the notion of abstraction may seem unmotivated at first. Bear with this difficulty until [Sec. 11.2](/en/books/cll/11/#sec-11-2).

An abstraction selbri is formed by taking a full bridi and preceding it by any cmavo of selma'o NU. There are twelve such cmavo; they are known as _abstractors_. The bridi is closed by the elidable terminator **kei**, of selma'o KEI. Thus, to change the bridi

<span id="ex-11-1"></span><span id="example-random-id-6EI1"></span>
> **mi klama le zarci**
> _I go-to the store_

into an abstraction using **nu**, one of the members of selma'o NU, we change it into

<span id="ex-11-2"></span><span id="example-random-id-Via0"></span>
> **nu mi klama le zarci [kei]**
> _an-event-of my going-to the store_

The bridi may be a simple selbri, or it may have associated sumti, as here. It is important to beware of eliding **kei** improperly, as many of the common uses of abstraction selbri involve following them with words that would appear to be part of the abstraction if **kei** had been elided.

(Technically, **kei** is never necessary, because the elidable terminator **vau** that closes every bridi can substitute for it; however, **kei** is specific to abstractions, and using it is almost always clearer.)

The grammatical uses of an abstraction selbri are exactly the same as those of a simple brivla. In particular, abstraction selbri may be used as observatives, as in [Example 11.2](/en/books/cll/11/#ex-11-2), or used in tanru:

<span id="ex-11-3"></span><span id="example-random-id-0Ff4"></span>
> **la djan. -- cu nu sonci kei -- djica**
> _That-named John is-an - (event-of being-a-soldier ) type-of desirer._
> _John wants to be a soldier._

Abstraction selbri may also be used in descriptions, preceded by **le** (or any other member of selma'o LE):

<span id="ex-11-4"></span><span id="example-random-id-sQ33"></span>
> **la djan. cu djica le nu sonci [kei]**
> _That-named John -- desires the event-of being-a-soldier._

We will most often use descriptions containing abstraction either at the end of a bridi, or just before the main selbri with its **cu**; in either of these circumstances, **kei** can normally be elided.

The place structure of an abstraction selbri depends on the particular abstractor, and will be explained individually in the following sections.

Note: In glosses of bridi within abstractions, the grammatical form used in the English changes. Thus, in the gloss of [Example 11.2](/en/books/cll/11/#ex-11-2) we see _my going-to the store_ rather than _I go-to the store_; likewise, in the glosses of [Example 11.3](/en/books/cll/11/#ex-11-3) and [Example 11.4](/en/books/cll/11/#ex-11-4) we see _being-a-soldier_ rather than _is-a-soldier_. This procedure reflects the desire for more understandable glosses, and does not indicate any change in the Lojban form. A bridi is a bridi, and undergoes no change when it is used as part of an abstraction selbri.

<span id="sec-11-2"></span><span id="section-events"></span>
### Event abstraction

The following cmavo is discussed in this section:

<table>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>**nu**</td>
<td>`NU`</td>
<td>event abstractor</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

The examples in [Sec. 11.1](/en/books/cll/11/#sec-11-1) made use of **nu** as the abstractor, and it is certainly the most common abstractor in Lojban text. Its purpose is to capture the event or state of the bridi considered as a whole. Do not confuse the **le** description built on a **nu** abstraction with ordinary descriptions based on **le** alone. The following sumti are quite distinct:

<span id="ex-11-5"></span><span id="example-random-id-qF0u"></span>
> **le klama**
> _the comer, that which comes_

<span id="ex-11-6"></span><span id="example-random-id-qF0U"></span>
> **le se klama**
> _the destination_

<span id="ex-11-7"></span><span id="example-random-id-qf11"></span>
> **le te klama**
> _the origin_

<span id="ex-11-8"></span><span id="example-random-id-qf22"></span>
> **le ve klama**
> _the route_

<span id="ex-11-9"></span><span id="example-random-id-qf4x"></span>
> **le xe klama**
> _the means of transportation_

<span id="ex-11-10"></span><span id="example-random-id-qf97"></span>
> **le nu klama**
> _the event of someone coming to somewhere from somewhere by some route using some means_

[Example 11.5](/en/books/cll/11/#ex-11-5) through [Example 11.9](/en/books/cll/11/#ex-11-9) are descriptions that isolate the five individual sumti places of the selbri **klama**. [Example 11.10](/en/books/cll/11/#ex-11-10) describes something associated with the bridi as a whole: the event of it.

In Lojban, the term _event_ is divorced from its ordinary English sense of something that happens over a short period of time. The description:

<span id="ex-11-11"></span><span id="example-random-id-mxAt"></span>
> **le nu mi vasxu**
> _the event-of my breathing_

is an event which lasts for the whole of my life (under normal circumstances). On the other hand,

<span id="ex-11-12"></span><span id="example-random-id-BPcI"></span>
> **le nu la djan. cinba la djein.**
> _the event-of that-named John kissing that-named Jane_

is relatively brief by comparison (again, under normal circumstances).

We can see from [Example 11.10](/en/books/cll/11/#ex-11-10) through [Example 11.12](/en/books/cll/11/#ex-11-12) that ellipsis of sumti is valid in the bridi of abstraction selbri, just as in the main bridi of a sentence. Any sumti may be ellipsized if the listener will be able to figure out from context what the proper value of it is, or else to recognize that the proper value is unimportant. It is extremely common for **nu** abstractions in descriptions to have the x₁ place ellipsized:

<span id="ex-11-13"></span><span id="example-random-id-FRoP"></span>
> **mi nelci le nu limna**
> _I like the event-of swimming._
> _I like swimming._

is elliptical, and most probably means:

<span id="ex-11-14"></span><span id="example-random-id-Ys8w"></span>
> **mi nelci le nu mi limna**
> _I like the event-of I swim._

In the proper context, of course, [Example 11.13](/en/books/cll/11/#ex-11-13) could refer to the event of somebody else swimming. Its English equivalent, _I like swimming_, can't be interpreted as _I like Frank's swimming_; this is a fundamental distinction between English and Lojban. In Lojban, an omitted sumti can mean whatever the context indicates that it should mean.

Note that the lack of an explicit NU cmavo in a sumti can sometimes hide an implicit abstraction. In the context of [Example 11.14](/en/books/cll/11/#ex-11-14), the appearance of **le se nelci** (_that which is liked_) is in effect an abstraction:

<span id="ex-11-15"></span><span id="example-random-id-sMsx"></span>
> **le se--nelci cu cafne**
> _The liked-thing -- is-frequent._
> _The thing which I like happens often._

which in this context means

My swimming happens often.

Event descriptions with **le nu** are commonly used to fill the _under conditions..._ places, among others, of gismu and lujvo place structures:

<span id="ex-11-16"></span><span id="example-random-id-Ia6f"></span>
> **la lojban. cu frili -- mi**
> _That-named Lojban -- is-easy-for me_

(The _when_ of the English would also be appropriate for a construction involving a Lojban tense, but the Lojban sentence says more than that the studying is concurrent with the ease.)

The place structure of a **nu** abstraction selbri is simply:

<span id="sec-11-3"></span><span id="section-event-types"></span>
### Types of event abstractions

The following cmavo are discussed in this section:

<table>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>**mu'e**</td>
<td>`NU`</td>
<td>point-event abstractor</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>**pu'u**</td>
<td>`NU`</td>
<td>process abstractor</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>**zu'o**</td>
<td>`NU`</td>
<td>activity abstractor</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>**za'i**</td>
<td>`NU`</td>
<td>state abstractor</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

Event abstractions with **nu** suffice to express all kinds of events, whether long, short, unique, repetitive, or whatever. Lojban also has more finely discriminating machinery for talking about events, however. There are four other abstractors of selma'o NU for talking about four specific types of events, or four ways of looking at the same event.

An event considered as a point in time is called a _point-event_, or sometimes an _achievement_. (This latter word should be divorced, in this context, from all connotations of success or triumph.) A point-event can be extended in duration, but it is still a point-event if it is thought of as unitary, having no internal structure. The abstractor **mu'e** means _point-event-of_:

<span id="ex-11-17"></span><span id="example-random-id-nFR1"></span>
> **le mu'e la djan. catra la djim. cu zekri**
> _The point-event-of (that-named John kills that-named Jim) -- is-a-crime._
> _John's killing Jim (considered as a point in time) is a crime._

An event considered as extended in time, and structured with a beginning, a middle containing one or more stages, and an end, is called a _process_. The abstractor **pu'u** means _process-of_:

<span id="ex-11-18"></span><span id="example-random-id-WaxD"></span>
> **ca'o le pu'u le latmo balje'a cu porpi kei**
> _[continuitive] the process-of( the Latin great-state - breaking-up )_

An event considered as extended in time and cyclic or repetitive is called an _activity_. The abstractor **zu'o** means _activity-of_:

<span id="ex-11-19"></span><span id="example-random-id-89nw"></span>
> **mi tatpi ri'a le zu'o mi plipe**
> _I am-tired because-of the activity-of (I jump)._
> _I am tired because I jump._

An event considered as something that is either happening or not happening, with sharp boundaries, is called a _state_. The abstractor **za'i** means _state-of_:

<span id="ex-11-20"></span><span id="example-random-id-WztQ"></span>
> **le za'i mi jmive cu ckape do**
> _The state-of (I am-alive) -- is-dangerous-to you._
> _My being alive is dangerous to you._

The abstractors in [Example 11.17](/en/books/cll/11/#ex-11-17) through [Example 11.20](/en/books/cll/11/#ex-11-20) could all have been replaced by **nu**, with some loss of precision. Note that Lojban allows every sort of event to be viewed in any of these four ways:

- the _state of running_ begins when the runner starts and ends when the runner stops;
- the _activity of running_ consists of the cycle _lift leg, step forward, drop leg, lift other leg..._ (each such cycle is a process, but the activity consists in the repetition of the cycle);
- the _process of running_ puts emphasis on the initial sprint, the steady speed, and the final slowdown;
- the _achievement of running_ is most alien to English, but sees the event of running as a single indivisible thing, like _Pheidippides' run from Marathon to Athens_ (the original marathon).

Further information on types of events can be found in [Sec. 11.12](/en/books/cll/11/#sec-11-12).

The four event type abstractors have the following place structures:

<span id="sec-11-4"></span><span id="section-properties"></span>
### Property abstractions

The following cmavo are discussed in this section:

<table>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>**ka**</td>
<td>`NU`</td>
<td>property abstractor</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>**ce'u**</td>
<td>`KOhA`</td>
<td>abstraction focus</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

The things described by **le nu** descriptions (or, to put it another way, the things of which **nu** selbri may correctly be predicated) are only moderately _abstract_. They are still closely tied to happenings in space and time. Properties, however, are much more ethereal. What is _the property of being blue_, or _the property of being a go-er_? They are what logicians call _intensions_. If John has a heart, then _the property of having a heart_ is an abstract object which, when applied to John, is true. In fact,

<span id="ex-11-21"></span><span id="example-random-id-YSUx"></span>
> **la djan. cu se--risna zo'e**
> _That-named John -- has-as-heart something-unspecified._
> _John has a heart._

has the same truth conditions as

<span id="ex-11-22"></span><span id="example-random-id-1PPS"></span>
> **la djan. cu ckaji**
> _That-named John -- has-the-property_

(The English word _have_ frequently appears in any discussion of Lojban properties: things are said to _have_ properties, but this is not the same sense of _have_ as in _I have money_, which is possession.)

Property descriptions, like event descriptions, are often wanted to fill places in brivla place structures:

<span id="ex-11-23"></span><span id="example-random-id-v3Ba"></span>
> **do cnino mi le ka xunre [kei]**
> _You are-new to-me in-the-quality-of-the property-of being-red._
> _You are new to me in redness._

(The English suffix _-ness_ often signals a property abstraction, as does the suffix _-ity_.)

We can also move the property description to the x₁ place of [Example 11.23](/en/books/cll/11/#ex-11-23), producing:

<span id="ex-11-24"></span><span id="example-random-id-proQ"></span>
> **le ka do xunre [kei] cu cnino mi**
> _The proposition-of you being-red -- -- is-new to--me._
> _Your redness is new to me._

It would be suitable to use [Example 11.23](/en/books/cll/11/#ex-11-23) and [Example 11.24](/en/books/cll/11/#ex-11-24) to someone who has returned from the beach with a sunburn.

There are several different properties that can be extracted from a bridi, depending on which place of the bridi is _understood_ as being specified externally. Thus:

<span id="ex-11-25"></span><span id="example-random-id-H71J"></span>
> **ka mi prami [zo'e] [kei]**
> _a-property-of me loving something-unspecified_

is quite different from

<span id="ex-11-26"></span><span id="example-random-id-wcxY"></span>
> **ka [zo'e] prami mi [kei]**
> _a-property-of something-unspecified loving me_

In particular, sentences like [Example 11.27](/en/books/cll/11/#ex-11-27) and [Example 11.28](/en/books/cll/11/#ex-11-28) are quite different in meaning:

<span id="ex-11-27"></span><span id="example-random-id-qfAM"></span>
> **la djan. cu zmadu la djordj.**
> _That-named John -- exceeds that-named George_

<span id="ex-11-28"></span><span id="example-random-id-qfav"></span>
> **la djan. cu zmadu la djordj.**
> _That-named John -- exceeds that-named George_

The _X_ used in the glosses of [Example 11.27](/en/books/cll/11/#ex-11-27) through [Example 11.28](/en/books/cll/11/#ex-11-28) as a place-holder cannot be represented only by ellipsis in Lojban, because ellipsis means that there must be a specific value that can fill the ellipsis, as mentioned in [Sec. 11.2](/en/books/cll/11/#sec-11-2). Instead, the cmavo **ce'u** of selma'o KOhA is employed when an explicit sumti is wanted. (The form _X_ will be used in literal translations.)

Therefore, an explicit equivalent of [Example 11.27](/en/books/cll/11/#ex-11-27), with no ellipsis, is:

<span id="ex-11-29"></span><span id="example-random-id-8DD8"></span>
> **la djan. cu zmadu la djordj.**
> _That-named John -- exceeds that-named George_

and of [Example 11.28](/en/books/cll/11/#ex-11-28) is:

<span id="ex-11-30"></span><span id="example-random-id-JKBQ"></span>
> **la djan. cu zmadu la djordj.**
> _That-named John -- exceeds that-named George_

This convention allows disambiguation of cases like:

<span id="ex-11-31"></span><span id="example-random-id-GiJp"></span>
> **le ka [zo'e] dunda le xirma [zo'e] [kei]**
> _the property-of -- giving the horse_

into

<span id="ex-11-32"></span><span id="example-random-id-1vc4"></span>
> **le ka ce'u dunda le xirma -- [zo'e] [kei]**
> _the property-of (X is-a-giver-of the horse to someone-unspecified )_
> _the property of being a giver of the horse_

which is the most natural interpretation of [Example 11.31](/en/books/cll/11/#ex-11-31), versus

<span id="ex-11-33"></span><span id="example-random-id-rDtg"></span>
> **le ka [zo'e] dunda le xirma -- ce'u [kei]**
> _the property-of (someone-unspecified is-a-giver-of the horse to X )_
> _the property of being one to whom the horse is given_

which is also a possible interpretation.

It is also possible to have more than one **ce'u** in a **ka** abstraction, which transforms it from a property abstraction into a relationship abstraction. Relationship abstractions _package up_ a complex relationship for future use; such an abstraction can be translated back into a selbri by placing it in the x₂ place of the selbri **bridi**, whose place structure is:

The place structure of **ka** abstraction selbri is simply:

<span id="sec-11-5"></span><span id="section-amounts"></span>
### Amount abstractions

The following cmavo is discussed in this section:

<table>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>**ni**</td>
<td>`NU`</td>
<td>amount abstraction</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

Amount abstractions are far more limited than event or property abstractions. They really make sense only if the selbri of the abstracted bridi is subject to measurement of some sort. Thus we can speak of:

<span id="ex-11-34"></span><span id="example-random-id-QW2C"></span>
> **le ni le pixra cu blanu [kei]**
> _the amount-of (the picture -- being-blue )_
> _the amount of blueness in the picture_

because _blueness_ could be measured with a colorimeter or a similar device. However,

<span id="ex-11-35"></span><span id="example-random-id-FyL4"></span>
> **le ni la djein. cu mamta [kei]**
> _the amount-of (that-named Jane -- being-a-mother )_
> _the amount of Jane's mother-ness (?)_

makes very little sense in either Lojban or English. We simply do not have any sort of measurement scale for being a mother.

Semantically, a sumti with **le ni** is a number; however, it cannot be treated grammatically as a quantifier in Lojban unless prefixed by the mathematical cmavo **mo'e**:

<span id="ex-11-36"></span><span id="example-random-id-SaTi"></span>
> **li pa vu'u mo'e le ni --**
> _the-number 1 minus the-operand the amount-of (_

Mathematical Lojban is beyond the scope of this chapter, and is explained more fully in [Ch. 18](/en/books/cll/18/#ch-18).

There are contexts where either property or amount abstractions make sense, and in such constructions, amount abstractions can make use of **ce'u** just like property abstractors. Thus,

<span id="ex-11-37"></span><span id="example-random-id-1LtX"></span>
> **le pixra cu cenba le ka ce'u blanu [kei]**
> _The picture -- varies in-the property-of (X is--blue )._
> _The picture varies in being blue._

is not the same as

<span id="ex-11-38"></span><span id="example-random-id-QKpo"></span>
> **le pixra cu cenba le ni ce'u blanu [kei]**
> _The picture -- varies in-the amount-of (X is--blue )._
> _The picture varies in how blue it is._

[Example 11.37](/en/books/cll/11/#ex-11-37) conveys that the blueness comes and goes, whereas [Example 11.38](/en/books/cll/11/#ex-11-38) conveys that its quantity changes over time.

Whenever we talk of measurement of an amount, there is some sort of scale, and so the place structure of **ni** abstraction selbri is:

Note: the best way to express the x₂ places of abstract sumti is to use something like **le ni ... kei be**. See [Example 11.62](/en/books/cll/11/#ex-11-62) for the use of this construction.

<span id="sec-11-6"></span><span id="section-truth-values"></span>
### Truth-value abstraction: jei

The _blueness of the picture_ discussed in [Sec. 11.5](/en/books/cll/11/#sec-11-5) refers to the measurable amount of blue pigment (or other source of blueness), not to the degree of truth of the claim that blueness is present. That abstraction is expressed in Lojban using **jei**, which is closely related semantically to **ni**. In the simplest cases, **le jei** produces not a number but a truth value:

<span id="ex-11-39"></span><span id="example-random-id-KuTE"></span>
> **le jei li re su'i re du li vo [kei]**
> _the truth-value-of the-number 2 + 2 = the-number 4_
> _the truth of 2 + 2 being 4_

is equivalent to _truth_, and

<span id="ex-11-40"></span><span id="example-random-id-nYY2"></span>
> **le jei li re su'i re du li mu [kei]**
> _the truth-value-of the-number 2 + 2 = the-number 5_
> _the truth of 2 + 2 being 5_

is equivalent to _falsehood_.

However, not everything in life (or even in Lojban) is simply true or false. There are shades of gray even in truth value, and **jei** is Lojban's mechanism for indicating the shade of grey intended:

<span id="ex-11-41"></span><span id="example-random-id-MRD8"></span>
> **mi ba jdice le jei la djordj.**
> _I [future] decide the (truth-value--of that-named George_

[Example 11.41](/en/books/cll/11/#ex-11-41) does not imply that George is, or is not, definitely a criminal. Depending on the legal system I am using, I may make some intermediate decision. As a result, **jei** requires an x₂ place analogous to that of **ni**:

Abstractions using **jei** are the mechanism for fuzzy logic in Lojban; the **jei** abstraction refers to a number between 0 and 1 inclusive (as distinct from **ni** abstractions, which are often on open-ended scales). The detailed conventions for using **jei** in fuzzy-logic contexts have not yet been established.

<span id="sec-11-7"></span><span id="section-predications"></span>
### Predication/sentence abstraction

The following cmavo is discussed in this section:

<table>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>**du'u**</td>
<td>`NU`</td>
<td>predication abstraction</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

There are some selbri which demand an entire predication as a sumti; they make claims about some predication considered as a whole. Logicians call these the _propositional attitudes_, and they include (in English) things like knowing, believing, learning, seeing, hearing, and the like. Consider the English sentence:

<span id="ex-11-42"></span><span id="example-random-id-7N2q"></span>
> _I know that Frank is a fool._

How's that in Lojban? Let us try:

<span id="ex-11-43"></span><span id="example-random-id-brpf"></span>
> **mi djuno le nu la frank. cu bebna [kei]**
> _I know the event of Frank being a fool._

Not quite right. Events are actually or potentially physical, and can't be contained inside one's mind, except for events of thinking, feeling, and the like; [Example 11.43](/en/books/cll/11/#ex-11-43) comes close to claiming that Frank's being-a-fool is purely a mental activity on the part of the speaker. (In fact, [Example 11.43](/en/books/cll/11/#ex-11-43) is an instance of improperly marked _sumti raising_, a concept discussed further in [Sec. 11.10](/en/books/cll/11/#sec-11-10)).

Try again:

<span id="ex-11-44"></span><span id="example-random-id-oCgP"></span>
> **mi djuno le jei la frank. cu bebna [kei]**
> _I know the truth-value of Frank being a fool._

Closer. [Example 11.44](/en/books/cll/11/#ex-11-44) says that I know whether or not Frank is a fool, but doesn't say that he is one, as [Example 11.42](/en/books/cll/11/#ex-11-42) does. To catch that nuance, we must say:

<span id="ex-11-45"></span><span id="example-random-id-6p1K"></span>
> **mi djuno le du'u la frank. cu bebna [kei]**
> _I know the predication that Frank is a fool._

Now we have it. Note that the implied assertion _Frank is a fool_ is not a property of **le du'u** abstraction, but of **djuno**; we can only know what is in fact true. (As a result, **djuno** like **jei** has a place for epistemology, which specifies how we know.) [Example 11.46](/en/books/cll/11/#ex-11-46) has no such implied assertion:

<span id="ex-11-46"></span><span id="example-random-id-eYiD"></span>
> **mi kucli le du'u la frank. cu bebna [kei]**
> _I am curious about whether Frank is a fool._

and here **du'u** could probably be replaced by **jei** without much change in meaning:

<span id="ex-11-47"></span><span id="example-random-id-h4De"></span>
> **mi kucli le jei la frank. cu bebna [kei]**
> _I am curious about how true it is that Frank is a fool._

As a matter of convenience rather than logical necessity, **du'u** has been given an x₂ place, which is a sentence (piece of language) expressing the bridi:

and **le se du'u ...** is very useful in filling places of selbri which refer to speaking, writing, or other linguistic behavior regarding bridi:

<span id="ex-11-48"></span><span id="example-random-id-hzd8"></span>
> **la djan. cusku le se--du'u**
> _That-named John expresses the (sentence-expressing-that_

[Example 11.48](/en/books/cll/11/#ex-11-48) differs from

<span id="ex-11-49"></span><span id="example-random-id-AX2I"></span>
> **la djan cusku lu**
> _That-named John expresses, quote,_

because [Example 11.49](/en/books/cll/11/#ex-11-49) claims that John actually said the quoted words, whereas [Example 11.48](/en/books/cll/11/#ex-11-48) claims only that he said some words or other which were to the same purpose.

**le se du'u** is much the same as **lu'e le du'u**, a symbol for the predication, but **se du'u** can be used as a selbri, whereas **lu'e** is ungrammatical in a selbri. (See [Sec. 6.10](/en/books/cll/6/#sec-6-10) for a discussion of **lu'e**.)

<span id="sec-11-8"></span><span id="section-indirect-questions"></span>
### Indirect questions

The following cmavo is discussed in this section:

<table>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>**kau**</td>
<td>`UI`</td>
<td>indirect question marker</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

There is an alternative type of sentence involving **du'u** and a selbri expressing a propositional attitude. In addition to sentences like

<span id="ex-11-50"></span><span id="example-random-id-Fpid"></span>
> _I know that John went to the store._

we can also say things like

<span id="ex-11-51"></span><span id="example-random-id-N4Ja"></span>
> _I know who went to the store._

This form is called an _indirect question_ in English because the embedded English sentence is a question: _Who went to the store?_ A person who says [Example 11.51](/en/books/cll/11/#ex-11-51) is claiming to know the answer to this question. Indirect questions can occur with many other English verbs as well: I can wonder, or doubt, or see, or hear, as well as know who went to the store.

To express indirect questions in Lojban, we use a **le du'u** abstraction, but rather than using a question word like _who_ (**ma** in Lojban), we use any word that will fit grammatically and mark it with the suffix particle **kau**. This cmavo belongs to selma'o UI, so grammatically it can appear anywhere. The simplest Lojban translation of [Example 11.51](/en/books/cll/11/#ex-11-51) is therefore:

<span id="ex-11-52"></span><span id="example-random-id-QUxG"></span>
> **mi djuno le du'u**
> _I know the predication-of_

In [Example 11.52](/en/books/cll/11/#ex-11-52), we have chosen to use **ma** as the word marked by **kau**. In fact, any other sumti would have done as well: **zo'e** or **da** or even **la djan.**. Using **la djan.** would suggest that it was John who I knew had gone to the store, however:

<span id="ex-11-53"></span><span id="example-random-id-hmDo"></span>
> **mi djuno le du'u**
> _I know the predication-of/fact-that_

Using one of the indefinite pro-sumti such as **ma**, **zo'e**, or **da** does not suggest any particular value.

Why does Lojban require the **kau** marker, rather than using **ma** as English and Chinese and many other languages do? Because **ma** always signals a direct question, and so

<span id="ex-11-54"></span><span id="example-random-id-5WU4"></span>
> **mi djuno le du'u ma pu klama le zarci**
> _I know the predication-of [what--sumti?] [past] goes-to the store_

means

<span id="ex-11-55"></span><span id="example-random-id-LDrc"></span>
> _Who is it that I know goes to the store?_

It is actually not necessary to use **le du'u** and **kau** at all if the indirect question involves a sumti; there is generally a paraphrase of the type:

<span id="ex-11-56"></span><span id="example-random-id-b6VT"></span>
> **mi djuno fi le pu klama be le zarci**
> _I know about the [past] goer to the store._
> _I know something about the one who went to the store (namely, his identity)._

because the x₃ place of **djuno** is the subject of knowledge, as opposed to the fact that is known. But when the questioned point is not a sumti, but (say) a logical connection, then there is no good alternative to **kau**:

<span id="ex-11-57"></span><span id="example-random-id-2nIX"></span>
> **mi ba zgana le du'u la djan.**
> _I [future] observe the predication-of/fact-that that-named John_

In addition, [Example 11.56](/en/books/cll/11/#ex-11-56) is only a loose paraphrase of [Example 11.52](/en/books/cll/11/#ex-11-52), because it is left to the listener's insight to realize that what is known about the goer-to-the-store is his identity rather than some other of his attributes.

<span id="sec-11-9"></span><span id="section-minor-abstractions"></span>
### Minor abstraction types

The following cmavo are discussed in this section:

<table>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>**li'i**</td>
<td>`NU`</td>
<td>experience abstractor</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>**si'o**</td>
<td>`NU`</td>
<td>concept abstractor</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>**su'u**</td>
<td>`NU`</td>
<td>general abstractor</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

There are three more abstractors in Lojban, all of them little used so far. The abstractor **li'i** expresses experience:

<span id="ex-11-58"></span><span id="example-random-id-FS6r"></span>
> **mi morji le li'i mi verba**
> _I remember the experience-of (my being-a-child)_

The abstractor **si'o** expresses a mental image, a concept, an idea:

<span id="ex-11-59"></span><span id="example-random-id-Yh42"></span>
> **mi nelci le si'o la lojban. cu mulno**
> _I enjoy the concept-of that-named Lojban -- being-complete._

Finally, the abstractor **su'u** is a vague abstractor, whose meaning must be grasped from context:

<span id="ex-11-60"></span><span id="example-random-id-ycKt"></span>
> **ko zgana le su'u le ci smacu cu bajra**
> _you--[imperative] observe the abstract-nature-of the three mice -- running_
> _See how the three mice run!_

All three of these abstractors have an x₂ place. An experience requires an experiencer, so the place structure of **li'i** is:

Similarly, an idea requires a mind to hold it, so the place structure of **si'o** is:

Finally, there needs to be some way of specifying just what sort of abstraction **su'u** is representing, so its place structure is:

The x₂ place of **su'u** allows it to serve as a substitute for any of the other abstractors, or as a template for creating new ones. For example,

<span id="ex-11-61"></span><span id="example-random-id-FnNR"></span>
> **le nu mi klama**
> _the event-of my going_

can be paraphrased as

<span id="ex-11-62"></span><span id="example-random-id-zvfX"></span>
> **le su'u mi klama kei be lo fasnu**
> _the abstract-nature-of (my going) -- of-type an event_

and there is a book whose title might be rendered in Lojban as:

<span id="ex-11-63"></span><span id="example-random-id-5Kw7"></span>
> **le su'u la .iecuas.**
> _the abstract-nature-of (that-named Jesus_

Note the importance of using **kei** after **su'u** when the x₂ of **su'u** (or any other abstractor) is being specified; otherwise, the **be lo** ends up inside the abstraction bridi.

<span id="sec-11-10"></span><span id="section-sumti-raising"></span>
### Lojban sumti raising

The following cmavo are discussed in this section:

<table>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>**tu'a**</td>
<td>`LAhE`</td>
<td>an abstraction involving</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>**jai**</td>
<td>`JAI`</td>
<td>abstraction conversion</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

It is sometimes inconvenient, in a situation where an abstract description is logically required, to express the abstraction. In English we can say:

<span id="ex-11-64"></span><span id="example-random-id-BYp8"></span>
> _I try to open the door._

which in Lojban is:

<span id="ex-11-65"></span><span id="example-random-id-1WER"></span>
> **mi troci le nu [mi] gasnu**
> _I try the event-of (I am-agent-in_

which has an abstract description within an abstract description, quite a complex structure. In English (but not in all other languages), we may also say:

<span id="ex-11-66"></span><span id="example-random-id-K14X"></span>
> _I try the door._

where it is understood that what I try is actually not the door itself, but the act of opening it. The same simplification can be done in Lojban, but it must be marked explicitly using a cmavo. The relevant cmavo is **tu'a**, which belongs to selma'o LAhE. The Lojban equivalent of [Example 11.66](/en/books/cll/11/#ex-11-66) is:

<span id="ex-11-67"></span><span id="example-random-id-gabC"></span>
> **mi troci tu'a le vorme**
> _I try some-action-to-do-with the door._

The term _sumti-raising_, as in the title of this section, signifies that a sumti which logically belongs within an abstraction (or even within an abstraction which is itself inside an intermediate abstraction) is _raised_ to the main bridi level. This transformation from [Example 11.65](/en/books/cll/11/#ex-11-65) to [Example 11.67](/en/books/cll/11/#ex-11-67) loses information: nothing except convention tells us what the abstraction was.

Using **tu'a** is a kind of laziness: it makes speaking easier at the possible expense of clarity for the listener. The speaker must be prepared for the listener to respond something like:

<span id="ex-11-68"></span><span id="example-random-id-mKBy"></span>
> **tu'a le vorme lu'u ki'a**
> _something-to-do-with the door [terminator] [confusion!]_

which indicates that **tu'a le vorme** cannot be understood. (The terminator for **tu'a** is **lu'u**, and is used in [Example 11.68](/en/books/cll/11/#ex-11-68) to make clear just what is being questioned: the sumti-raising, rather than the word **vorme** as such.) An example of a confusing raised sumti might be:

<span id="ex-11-69"></span><span id="example-random-id-9S5B"></span>
> **tu'a la djan. cu cafne**
> _something-to-do-with that-named John -- frequently-occurs_

This must mean that something which John does, or which happens to John, occurs frequently: but without more context there is no way to figure out what. Note that without the **tu'a**, [Example 11.69](/en/books/cll/11/#ex-11-69) would mean that John considered as an event frequently occurs – in other words, that John has some sort of on-and-off existence! Normally we do not think of people as events in English, but the x₁ place of **cafne** is an event, and if something that does not seem to be an event is put there, the Lojbanic listener will attempt to construe it as one. (Of course, this analysis assumes that **djan.** is the name of a person, and not the name of some event.)

Logically, a counterpart of some sort is needed to **tu'a** which transposes an abstract sumti into a concrete one. This is achieved at the selbri level by the cmavo **jai** (of selma'o JAI). This cmavo has more than one function, discussed in [Sec. 9.12](/en/books/cll/9/#sec-9-12) and [Sec. 10.22](/en/books/cll/10/#sec-10-22); for the purposes of this chapter, it operates as a conversion of selbri, similarly to the cmavo of selma'o SE. This conversion changes

<span id="ex-11-70"></span><span id="example-random-id-jAdY"></span>
> **tu'a mi rinka le nu do morsi**
> _something-to-do-with me causes the event-of you are-dead_
> _My action causes your death._

into

<span id="ex-11-71"></span><span id="example-random-id-R8SN"></span>
> **mi jai rinka le nu do morsi**
> _I am-associated-with causing the event-of your death._
> _I cause your death._

In English, the subject of _cause_ can either be the actual cause (an event), or else the agent of the cause (a person, typically); not so in Lojban, where the x₁ of **rinka** is always an event. [Example 11.70](/en/books/cll/11/#ex-11-70) and [Example 11.71](/en/books/cll/11/#ex-11-71) look equally convenient (or inconvenient), but in making descriptions, [Example 11.71](/en/books/cll/11/#ex-11-71) can be altered to:

<span id="ex-11-72"></span><span id="example-random-id-Jt1n"></span>
> **le jai rinka be le nu do morsi**
> _that-which-is associated-with causing ( the event-of your death )_
> _the one who caused your death_

because **jai** modifies the selbri and can be incorporated into the description – not so for **tu'a**.

The weakness of **jai** used in descriptions in this way is that it does not specify which argument of the implicit abstraction is being raised into the x₁ place of the description selbri. One can be more specific by using the modal form of **jai** explained in [Sec. 9.12](/en/books/cll/9/#sec-9-12):

<span id="ex-11-73"></span><span id="example-random-id-LPbo"></span>
> **le jai--gau rinka be le nu do morsi**
> _that-which-is agent-in causing ( the event-of your death )_

<span id="sec-11-11"></span><span id="section-events-and-contours"></span>
### Event-type abstractors and event contour tenses

This section is a logical continuation of [Sec. 11.3](/en/books/cll/11/#sec-11-3).

There exists a relationship between the four types of events explained in [Sec. 11.3](/en/books/cll/11/#sec-11-3) and the event contour tense cmavo of selma'o ZAhO. The specific cmavo of NU and of ZAhO are mutually interdefining; the ZAhO contours were chosen to fit the needs of the NU event types and vice versa. Event contours are explained in full in [Sec. 10.10](/en/books/cll/10/#sec-10-10), and only summarized here.

The purpose of ZAhO cmavo is to represent the natural portions of an event, such as the beginning, the middle, and the end. They fall into several groups:

- The cmavo **pu'o**, **ca'o**, and **ba'o** represent spans of time: before an event begins, while it is going on, and after it is over, respectively.
- The cmavo **co'a**, **de'a**, **di'a**, and **co'u** represent points of time: the start of an event, the temporary stopping of an event, the resumption of an event after a stop, and the end of an event, respectively. Not all events can have breaks in them, in which case **de'a** and **di'a** do not apply.
- The cmavo **mo'u** and **za'o** correspond to **co'u** and **ba'o** respectively, in the case of those events which have a natural ending point that may not be the same as the actual ending point: **mo'u** refers to the natural ending point, and **za'o** to the time between the natural ending point and the actual ending point (the _excessive_ or _superfective_ part of the event).
- The cmavo **co'i** represents an entire event considered as a point-event or achievement.

All these cmavo are applicable to events seen as processes and abstracted with **pu'u**. Only processes have enough internal structure to make all these points and spans of time meaningful.

For events seen as states and abstracted with **za'i**, the meaningful event contours are the spans **pu'o**, **ca'o**, and **ba'o**; the starting and ending points **co'a** and **co'u**, and the achievement contour **co'i**. States do not have natural endings distinct from their actual endings. (It is an open question whether states can be stopped and resumed.)

For events seen as activities and abstracted with **zu'o**, the meaningful event contours are the spans **pu'o**, **ca'o**, and **ba'o**, and the achievement contour **co'i**. Because activities are inherently cyclic and repetitive, the beginning and ending points are not well-defined: you do not know whether an activity has truly begun until it begins to repeat.

For events seen as point-events and abstracted with **mu'e**, the meaningful event contours are the spans **pu'o** and **ba'o** but not **ca'o** (a point-event has no duration), and the achievement contour **co'i**.

Note that the parts of events are themselves events, and may be treated as such. The points in time may be seen as **mu'e** point-events; the spans of time may constitute processes or activities. Therefore, Lojban allows us to refer to processes within processes, activities within states, and many other complicated abstract things.

<span id="sec-11-12"></span><span id="section-abstractor-connection"></span>
### Abstractor connection

An abstractor may be replaced by two or more abstractors joined by logical or non-logical connectives. Connectives are explained in detail in [Ch. 14](/en/books/cll/14/#ch-14). The connection can be expanded to one between two bridi which differ only in abstraction marker. [Example 11.74](/en/books/cll/11/#ex-11-74) and [Example 11.75](/en/books/cll/11/#ex-11-75) are equivalent in meaning:

<span id="ex-11-74"></span><span id="example-random-id-qFBV"></span>
> **le ka la frank. ciska cu xlali**
> _The quality-of that-named Frank writing - is-bad,_

<span id="ex-11-75"></span><span id="example-random-id-qFdz"></span>
> **le ka je ni la frank. ciska cu xlali**
> _The quality and quantity of Frank's writing is bad._

This feature of Lojban has hardly ever been used, and nobody knows what uses it may eventually have.

<span id="sec-11-13"></span><span id="section-summary"></span>
### Table of abstractors

The following table gives each abstractor, an English gloss for it, a Lojban gismu which is connected with it (more or less remotely: the associations between abstractors and gismu are meant more as memory hooks than for any kind of inference), the rafsi associated with it, and (on the following line) its place structure.

<table>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>**nu**</td>
<td></td>
<td>event of</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>**ka**</td>
<td></td>
<td>property of</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>**ni**</td>
<td></td>
<td>amount of</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>**jei**</td>
<td></td>
<td>truth-value of</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>**li'i**</td>
<td></td>
<td>experience of</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>**si'o**</td>
<td></td>
<td>idea of</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>**du'u**</td>
<td></td>
<td>predication of</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>**su'u**</td>
<td></td>
<td>abstraction of</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>**za'i**</td>
<td></td>
<td>state of</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>**zu'o**</td>
<td></td>
<td>activity of</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>**pu'u**</td>
<td></td>
<td>process of</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>**mu'e**</td>
<td></td>
<td>point-event of</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>
