## Chapter 14. If Wishes Were Horses: The Lojban Connective System

<span id="ch-14"></span><span id="chapter-connectives"></span><span id="chapter-connectives-picture"></span>
<!-- figure: media/chapter-connectives.gif -->

<span id="sec-14-1"></span><span id="section-connectives-introduction"></span>
### Logical connection and truth tables

Lojban is a logical language: the name of the language itself means _logical language_. The fundamentals of ordinary logic (there are variant logics, which aren't addressed in this book) include the notions of a _sentence_ (sometimes called a _statement_ or _proposition_), which asserts a truth or falsehood, and a small set of _truth functions_, which combine two sentences to create a new sentence. The truth functions have the special characteristic that the truth value (that is, the truth or falsehood) of the results depends only on the truth value of the component sentences. For example,

<span id="ex-14-1"></span><span id="example-random-id-mJ6y"></span>
> _John is a man or James is a woman._

is true if _John is a man_ is true, or if _James is a woman_ is true. If we know whether John is a man, and we know whether James is a woman, we know whether _John is a man or James is a woman_ is true, provided we know the meaning of _or_. Here _John is a man_ and _James is a woman_ are the component sentences.

We will use the phrase _negating a sentence_ to mean changing its truth value. An English sentence may always be negated by prefixing _It is false that ..._, or more idiomatically by inserting _not_ at the right point, generally before the verb. _James is not a woman_ is the negation of _James is a woman_, and vice versa. Recent slang can also negate a sentence by following it with the exclamation _Not!_

Words like _or_ are called _logical connectives_, and Lojban has many of them, as befits a logical language. This chapter is mostly concerned with explaining the forms and uses of the Lojban logical connectives. There are a number of other logical connectives in English such as _and_, _and/or_, _if_, _only if_, _whether or not_, and others; however, not every use of these English words corresponds to a logical connective. This point will be made clear in particular cases as needed. The other English meanings are supported by different Lojban connective constructs.

The Lojban connectives form a system (as the title of this chapter suggests), regular and predictable, whereas natural-language connectives are rather less systematic and therefore less predictable.

There exist 16 possible different truth functions. A truth table is a graphical device for specifying a truth function, making it clear what the value of the truth function is for every possible value of the component sentences. Here is a truth table for _or_:

<table>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>first</td>
<td>second</td>
<td>result</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>True</td>
<td>True</td>
<td>True</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>True</td>
<td>False</td>
<td>True</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>False</td>
<td>True</td>
<td>True</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>False</td>
<td>False</td>
<td>False</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

This table means that if the first sentence stated is true, and the second sentence stated is true, then the result of the truth function is also true. The same is true for every other possible combination of truth values except the one where both the first and the second sentences are false, in which case the truth value of the result is also false.

Suppose that _John is a man_ is true (and _John is not a man_ is false), and that _James is a woman_ is false (and _James is not a woman_ is true). Then the truth table tells us that

Note that the kind of _or_ used in this example can also be expressed (in formal English) with _and/or_. There is a different truth table for the kind of _or_ that means _either ... or ... but not both_.

To save space, we will write truth tables in a shorter format henceforth. Let the letters T and F stand for True and False. The rows will always be given in the order shown above: TT, TF, FT, FF for the two sentences. Then it is only necessary to give the four letters from the result column, which can be written TTTF, as can be seen by reading down the third column of the table above. So TTTF is the abbreviated truth table for the _or_ truth function. Here are the 16 possible truth functions, with an English version of what it means to assert that each function is, in fact, true (_first_ refers to the first sentence, and _second_ to the second sentence):

<table>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>TTTT</td>
<td>(always true)</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>TTTF</td>
<td>first is true and/or second is true.</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>TTFT</td>
<td>first is true if second is true.</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>TTFF</td>
<td>first is true whether or not second is true.</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>TFTT</td>
<td>first is true only if second is true.</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>TFTF</td>
<td>whether or not first is true, second is true.</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>TFFT</td>
<td>first is true if and only if second is true.</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>TFFF</td>
<td>first is true and second is true</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>FTTT</td>
<td>first and second are not both true.</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>FTTF</td>
<td>first or second is true, but not both.</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>FTFT</td>
<td>whether or not first is true, second is false.</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>FTFF</td>
<td>first is true, but second is false.</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>FFTT</td>
<td>first is false whether or not second is true.</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>FFTF</td>
<td>first is false, but second is true.</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>FFFT</td>
<td>neither first nor second is true.</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>FFFF</td>
<td>(always false)</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

Skeptics may work out the detailed truth tables for themselves.

<span id="sec-14-2"></span><span id="section-four-basics"></span>
### The Four basic vowels

Lojban regards four of these 16 truth functions as fundamental, and assigns them the four vowels A, E, O, and U. These letters do not represent actual cmavo or selma'o, but rather a component vowel from which actual logical-connective cmavo are built up, as explained in the next section. Here are the four vowels, their truth tables, and rough English equivalents:

<table>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>A</td>
<td>TTTF</td>
<td>or, and/or</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>E</td>
<td>TFFF</td>
<td>and</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>O</td>
<td>TFFT</td>
<td>if and only if</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>U</td>
<td>TTFF</td>
<td>whether or not</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

More precisely:

With the four vowels, the ability to negate either sentence, and the ability to exchange the sentences, as if their order had been reversed, we can create all of the 16 possible truth functions except TTTT and FFFF, which are fairly useless anyway. The following table illustrates how to create each of the 14 remaining truth functions:

<table>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>TTTF</td>
<td>A</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>TTFT</td>
<td>A with second sentence negated</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>TTFF</td>
<td>U</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>TFTT</td>
<td>A with first sentence negated</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>TFTF</td>
<td>U with sentences exchanged</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>TFFT</td>
<td>O</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>TFFF</td>
<td>E</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>FTTT</td>
<td>A with both sentences negated</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>FTTF</td>
<td>O with either first or second negated (not both)</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>FTFT</td>
<td>U with sentences exchanged and then second negated</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>FTFF</td>
<td>E with second sentence negated</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>FFTT</td>
<td>U with first sentence negated</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>FFTF</td>
<td>E with first sentence negated</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>FFFT</td>
<td>E with both sentences negated</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

Note that exchanging the sentences is only necessary with U. The three other basic truth functions are commutative; that is, they mean the same thing regardless of the order of the component sentences. There are other ways of getting some of these truth tables; these just happen to be the methods usually employed.

<span id="sec-14-3"></span><span id="section-six-types"></span>
### The six types of logical connectives

In order to remain unambiguous, Lojban cannot have only a single logical connective for each truth function. There are many places in the grammar of the language where logical connection is permitted, and each must have its appropriate set of connectives. If the connective suitable for sumti were used to connect selbri, ambiguity would result.

Consider the English sentence:

<span id="ex-14-2"></span><span id="example-random-id-ptgf"></span>
> _Mary went to the window and ..._

where the last word could be followed by _the door_, a noun phrase, or by _saw the horses_, a sentence with subject omitted, or by _John went to the door_, a full sentence, or by one of a variety of other English grammatical constructions. Lojban cannot tolerate such grammatical looseness.

Instead, there are a total of five different selma'o used for logical connection: A, GA, GIhA, GUhA, and JA. Each of these includes four cmavo, one based on each of the four vowels, which is always the last vowel in the cmavo. In selma'o A, the vowel is the entire cmavo.

Thus, in selma'o A, the cmavo for the function A is **a**. (Do not confuse A, which is a selma'o, with A, which is a truth function, or **a**, which is a cmavo.) Likewise, the cmavo for E in selma'o GIhA is **gi'e**, and the cmavo for U in selma'o GA is **gu**. This systematic regularity makes the cmavo easier to learn.

Obviously, four cmavo are not enough to express the 14 truth functions explained in [Sec. 14.1](/en/books/cll/14/#sec-14-1). Therefore, compound cmavo must be used. These compound cmavo follow a systematic pattern: each has one cmavo from the five logical connection selma'o at its heart, and may also contain one or more of the auxiliary cmavo **se**, **na**, or **nai**. Which auxiliaries are used with which logical connection cmavo, and with what grammar and meaning, will be explained in the following sections. The uses of each of these auxiliary cmavo relates to its other uses in other parts of Lojban grammar.

For convenience, each of the types of compound cmavo used for logical connection is designated by a Lojban name. The name is derived by changing the final _-A_ of the selma'o name to _-ek_; the reasons for using _-ek_ are buried deep in the history of the Loglan Project. Thus, compound cmavo based on selma'o A are known as eks, and those based on selma'o JA are known as jeks. (When writing in English, it is conventional to use _eks_ as the plural of _ek_.) When the term _logical connective_ is used in this chapter, it refers to one or more of these kinds of compound cmavo.

Why does the title of this section refer to _six types_ when there are only five selma'o? A jek may be preceded by **i**, the usual Lojban cmavo for connecting two sentences. The compound produced by **i** followed by a jek is known as an ijek. It is useful to think of ijeks as a sixth kind of logical connective, parallel to eks, jeks, geks, giheks, and guheks.

There also exist giks, joiks, ijoiks, and joigiks, which are not logical connectives, but are other kinds of compound cmavo which will be introduced later.

<span id="sec-14-4"></span><span id="section-bridi-connection"></span>
### Logical connection of bridi

Now we are ready to express [Example 14.1](/en/books/cll/14/#ex-14-1) in Lojban! The kind of logical connective which is placed between two Lojban bridi to connect them logically is an ijek:

<span id="ex-14-3"></span><span id="example-random-id-h2hN"></span>
> **la djan. nanmu .ija la djeimyz. ninmu**
> _That-named John is-a-man or that-named James is-a-woman._

Here we have two separate Lojban bridi, **la djan. nanmu** and **la djeimyz. ninmu**. These bridi are connected by **.i****ja**, the ijek for the truth function A. The **i** portion of the ijek tells us that we are dealing with separate sentences here. Similarly, we can now say:

<span id="ex-14-4"></span><span id="example-random-id-qGiu"></span>
> **la djan. nanmu .ije la djeimyz. ninmu**
> _That-named John is-a-man and that-named James is-a-woman._

<span id="ex-14-5"></span><span id="example-random-id-qGIu"></span>
> **la djan. nanmu .ijo la djeimyz. ninmu**
> _That-named John is-a-man if-and-only-if that-named James is-a-woman._

<span id="ex-14-6"></span><span id="example-random-id-qgJC"></span>
> **la djan. nanmu .iju la djeimyz. ninmu**
> _That-named John is-a-man whether-or-not that-named James is-a-woman._

To obtain the other truth tables listed in [Sec. 14.2](/en/books/cll/14/#sec-14-2), we need to know how to negate the two bridi which represent the component sentences. We could negate them directly by inserting **na** before the selbri, but Lojban also allows us to place the negation within the connective itself.

To negate the first or left-hand bridi, prefix **na** to the JA cmavo but after the **i**. To negate the second or right-hand bridi, suffix **-nai** to the JA cmavo. In either case, the negating word is placed on the side of the connective that is closest to the bridi being negated.

So to express the truth table FTTF, which requires O with either of the two bridi negated (not both), we can say either:

<span id="ex-14-7"></span><span id="example-random-id-qgKB"></span>
> **la djan. nanmu .inajo la djeimyz. ninmu**
> _That-named John is-not-a-man if-and-only-if that-named James is-a-woman._

<span id="ex-14-8"></span><span id="example-random-id-qgLH"></span>
> **la djan. nanmu .ijonai la djeimyz. ninmu**
> _That-named John is-a-man if-and-only-if that-named James is-not-a-woman._

The meaning of both [Example 14.7](/en/books/cll/14/#ex-14-7) and [Example 14.8](/en/books/cll/14/#ex-14-8) is the same as that of:

<span id="ex-14-9"></span><span id="example-random-id-1Kp9"></span>
> _John is a man or James is a woman, but not both._

Here is another example:

<span id="ex-14-10"></span><span id="example-random-id-FXSC"></span>
> **la djan. nanmu .ijanai la djeimyz. ninmu**
> _That-named John is-a-man or that-named James is-not-a-woman._
> _John is a man if James is a woman._

How's that again? Are those two English sentences in [Example 14.10](/en/books/cll/14/#ex-14-10) really equivalent? In English, no. The Lojban TTFT truth function can be glossed _A if B_, but the _if_ does not quite have its English sense. [Example 14.10](/en/books/cll/14/#ex-14-10) is true so long as John is a man, even if James is not a woman; likewise, it is true just because James is not a woman, regardless of John's gender. This kind of _if-then_ is technically known as a _material conditional_.

Since James is not a woman (by our assertions in [Sec. 14.1](/en/books/cll/14/#sec-14-1)), the English sentence _John is a man if James is a woman_ seems to be neither true nor false, since it assumes something which is not true. It turns out to be most convenient to treat this _if_ as TTFT, which on investigation means that [Example 14.10](/en/books/cll/14/#ex-14-10) is true. [Example 14.11](/en/books/cll/14/#ex-14-11), however, is equally true:

<span id="ex-14-11"></span><span id="example-random-id-EdY5"></span>
> **la djan. ninmu .ijanai la djeimyz. ninmu**
> _That-named John is-a-woman if that-named James is-a-woman._

This can be thought of as a principle of consistency, and may be paraphrased as follows: _If a false statement is true, any statement follows from it._ All uses of English _if_ must be considered very carefully when translating into Lojban to see if they really fit this Lojban mold.

[Example 14.12](/en/books/cll/14/#ex-14-12), which uses the TFTT truth function, is subject to the same rules: the stated gloss of TFTT as _only if_ works naturally only when the right-hand bridi is false; if it is true, the left-hand bridi may be either true or false. The last gloss of [Example 14.12](/en/books/cll/14/#ex-14-12) illustrates the use of _if ... then_ as a more natural substitute for _only if_.

<span id="ex-14-12"></span><span id="example-random-id-9CCS"></span>
> **la djan. nanmu .inaja la djeimyz. ninmu**
> _That-named John is-not-a-man or that-named James is-a-woman._
> _John is a man only if James is a woman._

The following example illustrates the use of **se** to, in effect, exchange the two sentences. The normal use of **se** is to (in effect) transpose places of a bridi, as explained in [Sec. 5.11](/en/books/cll/5/#sec-5-11).

<span id="ex-14-13"></span><span id="example-random-id-z43X"></span>
> **la djan. nanmu .iseju la djeimyz. ninmu**
> _Whether or not John is a man, James is a woman._

If both **na** and **se** are present, which is legal but never necessary, **na** would come before **se**.

The full syntax of ijeks, therefore, is:

where the cmavo in brackets are optional.

<span id="sec-14-5"></span><span id="section-forethought-bridi-connection"></span>
### Forethought bridi connection

Many concepts in Lojban are expressible in two different ways, generally referred to as _afterthought_ and _forethought_. [Sec. 14.4](/en/books/cll/14/#sec-14-4) discussed what is called _afterthought bridi logical connection_. The word _afterthought_ is used because the connective cmavo and the second bridi were added, as it were, afterwards and without changing the form of the first bridi. This form might be used by someone who makes a statement and then wishes to add or qualify that statement after it has been completed. Thus,

<span id="ex-14-14"></span><span id="example-random-id-dp8V"></span>
is a complete bridi, and adding an afterthought connection to make

<span id="ex-14-15"></span><span id="example-random-id-7h3s"></span>
> **la djan. nanmu .ija la djeimyz. ninmu**
> _John is a man or James is a woman (or both)_

provides additional information without requiring any change in the form of what has come before; changes which may not be possible or practical, especially in speaking. (The meaning, however, may be changed by the use of a negating connective.) Afterthought connectives make it possible to construct all the important truth-functional relationships in a variety of ways.

In forethought style the speaker decides in advance, before expressing the first bridi, that a logical connection will be expressed. Forethought and afterthought connectives are expressed with separate selma'o. The forethought logical connectives corresponding to afterthought ijeks are geks:

<span id="ex-14-16"></span><span id="example-random-id-mYeS"></span>
> **ga la djan. nanmu gi la djeimyz. ninmu**
> _Either John is a man or James is a woman (or both)._

**ga** is the cmavo which represents the A truth function in selma'o GA. The word **gi** does not belong to GA at all, but constitutes its own selma'o: it serves only to separate the two bridi without having any content of its own. The English translation of **ga**…**gi** is _either ... or_, but in the English form the truth function is specified both by the word _either_ and by the word _or_: not so in Lojban.

Even though two bridi are being connected, geks and giks do not have any **i** in them. The forethought construct binds up the two bridi into a single sentence as far as the grammar is concerned.

Some more examples of forethought bridi connection are:

<span id="ex-14-17"></span><span id="example-random-id-qGLh"></span>
> **ge la djan. nanmu gi la djeimyz. ninmu**
> _(It is true that) both John is a man and James is a woman._

<span id="ex-14-18"></span><span id="example-random-id-qgMN"></span>
> **gu la djan. nanmu gi la djeimyz. ninmu**
> _It is true that John is a man, whether or not James is a woman._

It is worth emphasizing that [Example 14.18](/en/books/cll/14/#ex-14-18) does not assert that James is (or is not) a woman. The **gu** which indicates that **la djeimyz. ninmu** may be true or false is unfortunately rather remote from the bridi thus affected.

Perhaps the most important of the truth functions commonly expressed in forethought is TFTT, which can be paraphrased as _if ... then ..._:

<span id="ex-14-19"></span><span id="example-random-id-Xcg1"></span>
> **ganai la djan. nanmu gi la djeimyz. ninmu**
> _Either that-named John is-not-a-man, or that-named James is-a-woman._
> _If John is a man, then James is a woman._

Note the placement of the **nai** in [Example 14.19](/en/books/cll/14/#ex-14-19). When added to afterthought selma'o such as JA, a following **nai** negates the second bridi, to which it is adjacent. Since GA cmavo precede the first bridi, a following **nai** negates the first bridi instead.

Why does English insist on forethought in the translation of [Example 14.19](/en/books/cll/14/#ex-14-19)? Possibly because it would be confusing to seemingly assert a sentence and then make it conditional (which, as the Lojban form shows, involves a negation). Truth functions which involve negating the first sentence may be confusing, even to the Lojbanic understanding, when expressed using afterthought.

It must be reiterated here that not every use of English _if ... then_ is properly translated by **.i****na****ja** or **ganai**…**gi**; anything with implications of time needs a somewhat different Lojban translation, which will be discussed in [Sec. 14.18](/en/books/cll/14/#sec-14-18). Causal sentences like _If you feed the pig, then it will grow_ are not logical connectives of any type, but rather need a translation using **rinka** as the selbri joining two event abstractions, thus:

<span id="ex-14-20"></span><span id="example-random-id-TQP9"></span>
> **le nu do cidja dunda fi le xarju**
> _The event-of (you food give to the pig)_

Causality is discussed in far more detail in [Sec. 9.7](/en/books/cll/9/#sec-9-7).

[Example 14.21](/en/books/cll/14/#ex-14-21) and [Example 14.22](/en/books/cll/14/#ex-14-22) illustrates a truth function, FTTF, which needs to negate either the first or the second bridi. We already understand how to negate the first bridi:

<span id="ex-14-21"></span><span id="example-random-id-I2jU"></span>
> **gonai la djan. nanmu gi la djeimyz. ninmu**
> _John is not a man if and only if James is a woman._

How can the second bridi be negated? By adding **-nai** to the **gi**.

<span id="ex-14-22"></span><span id="example-random-id-Tiz6"></span>
> **go la djan. nanmu ginai la djeimyz. ninmu**
> _John is a man if and only if James is not a woman._

A compound cmavo based on **gi** is called a gik; the only giks are **gi** itself and **gi****nai**.

Further examples:

<span id="ex-14-23"></span><span id="example-random-id-qgmv"></span>
> **ge la djan. nanmu ginai la djeimyz. ninmu**
> _John is a man and James is not a woman._

<span id="ex-14-24"></span><span id="example-random-id-qgMy"></span>
> **ganai la djan. nanmu ginai la djeimyz. ninmu**
> _John is not a man or James is not a woman._

The syntax of geks is:

and of giks (which are not themselves connectives, but part of the machinery of forethought connection) is:

<span id="sec-14-6"></span><span id="section-sumti-connection"></span>
### sumti connection

Geks and ijeks are sufficient to state every possible logical connection between two bridi. However, it is often the case that two bridi to be logically connected have one or more portions in common:

<span id="ex-14-25"></span><span id="example-random-id-Ecnq"></span>
> **la djan. klama le zarci .ije la .alis. klama le zarci**
> _John goes to the market, and Alice goes to the market._

Here only a single sumti differs between the two bridi. Lojban does not require that both bridi be expressed in full. Instead, a single bridi can be given which contains both of the different sumti and uses a logical connective from a different selma'o to combine the two sumti:

<span id="ex-14-26"></span><span id="example-random-id-JTIm"></span>
> **la djan .e la .alis. klama le zarci**
> _That-named John and that-named Alice go-to the market._

[Example 14.26](/en/books/cll/14/#ex-14-26) means exactly the same thing as [Example 14.25](/en/books/cll/14/#ex-14-25): one may be rigorously transformed into the other without any change of logical meaning. This rule is true in general for every different kind of logical connection in Lojban; all of them, with one exception (see [Sec. 14.12](/en/books/cll/14/#sec-14-12)), can always be transformed into a logical connection between sentences that expresses the same truth function.

The afterthought logical connectives between sumti are eks, which contain a connective cmavo of selma'o A. If ijeks were used in [Example 14.26](/en/books/cll/14/#ex-14-26), the meaning would be changed:

<span id="ex-14-27"></span><span id="example-random-id-7KHA"></span>
> **la djan. -- .ije**
> _That-named John [is/does-something]. And_

leaving the reader uncertain why John is mentioned at all.

Any ek may be used between sumti, even if there is no direct English equivalent:

<span id="ex-14-28"></span><span id="example-random-id-BDLS"></span>
> **la djan. .o la .alis. klama le zarci**
> _That-named John if-and-only-if that-named Alice goes-to the market._
> _John goes to the market if, and only if, Alice does._

The second line of [Example 14.27](/en/books/cll/14/#ex-14-27) is highly stilted English, but the first line (of which it is a literal translation) is excellent Lojban.

What about forethought sumti connection? As is the case for bridi connection, geks are appropriate. They are not the only selma'o of forethought logical-connectives, but are the most commonly used ones.

<span id="ex-14-29"></span><span id="example-random-id-YEa4"></span>
> **ga la djan. gi la .alis. klama le zarci**
> _Either John or Alice (or both) goes to the market._

Of course, eks include all the same patterns of compound cmavo that ijeks do. When **na** or **se** is part of an ek, a special writing convention is invoked, as in the following example:

<span id="ex-14-30"></span><span id="example-random-id-caoY"></span>
> **la djan. na.a la .alis. klama le zarci**
> _That-named John only-if that-named Alice goes-to the market._
> _John goes to the market only if Alice does._

Note the period in **na****.a**. The cmavo of A begin with vowels, and therefore must always be preceded by a pause. It is conventional to write all connective compounds as single words (with no spaces), but this pause must still be marked in writing as in speech; otherwise, the **na** and **a** would tend to run together.

<span id="sec-14-7"></span><span id="section-more-propositions"></span>
### More than two propositions

So far we have seen logical connectives used to connect exactly two sentences. How about connecting three or more? Is this possible in Lojban? The answer is yes, subject to some warnings and some restrictions.

Of the four primitive truth functions A, E, O, and U, all but O have the same truth values no matter how their component sentences are associated in pairs. Therefore,

<span id="ex-14-31"></span><span id="example-random-id-9tHr"></span>
> **mi dotco .ije mi ricfu .ije mi nanmu**
> _I am-German. And I am-rich. And I am-a-man._

means that all three component sentences are true. Likewise,

<span id="ex-14-32"></span><span id="example-random-id-MCsf"></span>
> **mi dotco .ija mi ricfu .ija mi nanmu**
> _I am-German. Or I am-rich. Or I am-a-man._

means that one or more of the component sentences is true.

O, however, is different. Working out the truth table for

<span id="ex-14-33"></span><span id="example-random-id-3zE1"></span>
> **mi dotco .ijo mi ricfu .ijo mi nanmu**
> _I am-German. If-and-only-if I am-rich. If-and-only-if I am-a-man._

shows that [Example 14.33](/en/books/cll/14/#ex-14-33) does not mean that either I am all three of these things or none of them; instead, an accurate translation would be:

Of the three properties – German-ness, wealth, and manhood – I possess either exactly one or else all three.

Because of the counterintuitiveness of this outcome, it is safest to avoid O with more than two sentences. Likewise, the connectives which involve negation also have unexpected truth values when used with more than two sentences.

In fact, no combination of logical connectives can produce the _all or none_ interpretation intended (but not achieved) by [Example 14.33](/en/books/cll/14/#ex-14-33) without repeating one of the bridi. See [Example 14.48](/en/books/cll/14/#ex-14-48).

There is an additional difficulty with the use of more than two sentences. What is the meaning of:

<span id="ex-14-34"></span><span id="example-random-id-mLo1"></span>
> **mi nelci la djan. .ije mi nelci la martas.**
> _I like that-named John. And I like that-named Martha._

Does this mean:

<span id="ex-14-35"></span><span id="example-random-id-BSuT"></span>
> _I like John, and I like either Martha or Mary or both._

Or is the correct translation:

<span id="ex-14-36"></span><span id="example-random-id-dPcI"></span>
> _Either I like John and I like Martha, or I like Mary, or both._

[Example 14.36](/en/books/cll/14/#ex-14-36) is the correct translation of [Example 14.34](/en/books/cll/14/#ex-14-34). The reason is that Lojban logical connectives pair off from the left, like many constructs in the language. This rule, called the left-grouping rule, is easy to forget, especially when intuition pulls the other way. Forethought connectives are not subject to this problem:

<span id="ex-14-37"></span><span id="example-random-id-487z"></span>
> **ga ge mi nelci la djan.**
> _Either (Both I like that-named John_

is equivalent in meaning to [Example 14.34](/en/books/cll/14/#ex-14-34), whereas

<span id="ex-14-38"></span><span id="example-random-id-1Dd2"></span>
> **ge mi nelci la djan.**
> _Both I like that-named John_

is not equivalent to [Example 14.34](/en/books/cll/14/#ex-14-34), but is instead a valid translation into Lojban, using forethought, of [Example 14.35](/en/books/cll/14/#ex-14-35).

<span id="sec-14-8"></span><span id="section-afterthought-connectives-grouping"></span>
### Grouping of afterthought connectives

There are several ways in Lojban to render [Example 14.35](/en/books/cll/14/#ex-14-35) using afterthought only. The simplest method is to make use of the cmavo **bo** (of selma'o BO). This cmavo has several functions in Lojban, but is always associated with high precedence and short scope. In particular, if **bo** is placed after an ijek, the result is a grammatically distinct kind of ijek which overrides the regular left-grouping rule. Connections marked with **bo** are interpreted before connections not so marked. [Example 14.39](/en/books/cll/14/#ex-14-39) is equivalent in meaning to [Example 14.38](/en/books/cll/14/#ex-14-38):

<span id="ex-14-39"></span><span id="example-random-id-Uu7D"></span>
> **mi nelci la djan. .ije mi nelci la martas.**
> _I like that-named John, and I like that-named Martha_

The English translation feebly indicates with a comma what the Lojban marks far more clearly: the _I like Martha_ and _I like Mary_ sentences are joined by **.i****ja** first, before the result is joined to _I like John_ by **.i****je**.

Eks can have **bo** attached in exactly the same way, so that [Example 14.40](/en/books/cll/14/#ex-14-40) is equivalent in meaning to [Example 14.39](/en/books/cll/14/#ex-14-39):

<span id="ex-14-40"></span><span id="example-random-id-JVhK"></span>
Forethought connectives, however, never can be suffixed with **bo**, for every use of forethought connectives clearly indicates the intended pattern of grouping.

What happens if **bo** is used on both connectives, giving them the same high precedence, as in [Example 14.41](/en/books/cll/14/#ex-14-41)?

<span id="ex-14-41"></span><span id="example-random-id-YJeE"></span>
Does this wind up meaning the same as [Example 14.34](/en/books/cll/14/#ex-14-34) and [Example 14.36](/en/books/cll/14/#ex-14-36)? Not at all. A second rule relating to **bo** is that where several **bo**-marked connectives are used in succession, the normal Lojban left-grouping rule is replaced by a right-grouping rule. As a result, [Example 14.41](/en/books/cll/14/#ex-14-41) in fact means the same as [Example 14.39](/en/books/cll/14/#ex-14-39) and [Example 14.40](/en/books/cll/14/#ex-14-40). This rule may be occasionally exploited for special effects, but is tricky to keep straight; in writing intended to be easy to understand, multiple consecutive connectives marked with **bo** should be avoided.

The use of **bo**, therefore, gets tricky in complex connections of more than three sentences. Looking back at the English translations of [Example 14.37](/en/books/cll/14/#ex-14-37) and [Example 14.38](/en/books/cll/14/#ex-14-38), parentheses were used to clarify the grouping. These parentheses have their Lojban equivalents, two sets of them actually. **tu'e** and **tu'u** are used with ijeks, and **ke** and **ke'e** with eks and other connectives to be discussed later. (**ke** and **ke'e** are also used in other roles in the language, but always as grouping markers). Consider the English sentence:

<span id="ex-14-42"></span><span id="example-random-id-aqIg"></span>
> _I kiss you and you kiss me, if I love you and you love me._

where the semantics tells us that the instances of _and_ are meant to have higher precedence than that of _if_. If we wish to express [Example 14.42](/en/books/cll/14/#ex-14-42) in afterthought, we can say:

<span id="ex-14-43"></span><span id="example-random-id-1PSK"></span>
> **mi cinba do .ije[bo] do cinba mi**
> _I kiss you and you kiss me,_

marking two of the ijeks with **bo** for high precedence. (The first **bo** is not strictly necessary, because of the left-grouping rule, and is shown here in brackets.)

But it may be clearer to use explicit parenthesis words and say:

<span id="ex-14-44"></span><span id="example-random-id-erTb"></span>
> **tu'e mi cinba do .ije do cinba mi tu'u**
> _( I kiss you and you kiss me )_

where the **tu'e**…**tu'u** pairs set off the structure. The cmavo **tu'u** is an elidable terminator, and its second occurrence in [Example 14.44](/en/books/cll/14/#ex-14-44) is bracketed, because all terminators may be elided at the end of a text.

In addition, parentheses are a general solution: multiple parentheses may be nested inside one another, and additional afterthought material may be added without upsetting the existing structure. Neither of these two advantages apply to **bo** grouping. In general, afterthought constructions trade generality for simplicity.

Because of the left-grouping rule, the first set of **tu'e**…**tu'u** parentheses may actually be left off altogether, producing:

<span id="ex-14-45"></span><span id="example-random-id-QGBz"></span>
> **mi cinba do .ije do cinba mi**
> _I kiss you and you kiss me_

What about parenthesized sumti connection? Consider

<span id="ex-14-46"></span><span id="example-random-id-y9CC"></span>
> _I walk to either the market and the house, or the school and the office._

Two pairs of parentheses, analogous to [Example 14.44](/en/books/cll/14/#ex-14-44), would seem to be the right approach. However, it is a rule of Lojban grammar that a sumti may not begin with **ke**, so the first set of parentheses must be omitted, producing [Example 14.47](/en/books/cll/14/#ex-14-47), which is instead parallel to [Example 14.45](/en/books/cll/14/#ex-14-45):

<span id="ex-14-47"></span><span id="example-random-id-0mJM"></span>
> **mi dzukla le zarci .e le zdani**
> _I walk-to the market and the house_

If sumti were allowed to begin with **ke**, unavoidable ambiguities would result, so **ke** grouping of sumti is allowed only just after a logical connective. This rule does not apply to **tu'e** grouping of bridi, as [Example 14.44](/en/books/cll/14/#ex-14-44) shows.

Now we have enough facilities to handle the problem of [Example 14.33](/en/books/cll/14/#ex-14-33): _I am German, rich, and a man – or else none of these._ The following paraphrase has the correct meaning:

<span id="ex-14-48"></span><span id="example-random-id-KyHw"></span>
> **[tu'e] mi dotco .ijo mi ricfu [tu'u]**
> _( I am-German if-and-only-if I am-rich )_

The truth table, when worked out, produces T if and only if all three component sentences are true or all three are false.

<span id="sec-14-9"></span><span id="section-compound-bridi"></span>
### Compound bridi

So far we have seen how to handle two sentences that need have no similarity at all (bridi connection) and sentences that are identical except for a difference in one sumti (sumti connection). It would seem natural to ask how to logically connect sentences that are identical except for having different selbri.

Surprise! Lojban provides no logical connective that is designed to handle selbri and nothing else. Instead, selbri connection is provided as part of a more general-purpose mechanism called _compound bridi_. Compound bridi result from logically connecting sentences that differ in their selbri and possibly some of their sumti.

The simplest cases result when the x₁ sumti is the only common point:

<span id="ex-14-49"></span><span id="example-random-id-WebJ"></span>
> **mi klama le zarci .ije mi nelci la djan.**
> _I go-to the market, and I like that-named John._

is equivalent in meaning to the compound bridi:

<span id="ex-14-50"></span><span id="example-random-id-9H9e"></span>
> **mi klama le zarci gi'e nelci la djan.**
> _I go-to the market and like that-named John._

As [Example 14.50](/en/books/cll/14/#ex-14-50) indicates, giheks are used in afterthought to create compound bridi; **gi'e** is the gihek corresponding to _and_. The actual phrases **klama le zarci** and **nelci la djan.** that the gihek connects are known as _bridi-tails_, because they represent (in this use) the _tail end_ of a bridi, including the selbri and any following sumti, but excluding any sumti that precede the selbri:

<span id="ex-14-51"></span><span id="example-random-id-F3RE"></span>
> **mi ricfu gi'e klama le zarci**
> _I am-rich and go-to the market._

In [Example 14.51](/en/books/cll/14/#ex-14-51), the first bridi-tail is **ricfu**, a simple selbri, and the second bridi-tail is **klama le zarci**, a selbri with one following sumti.

Suppose that more than a single sumti is identical between the two sentences:

<span id="ex-14-52"></span><span id="example-random-id-PRxj"></span>
> **mi dunda le cukta do .ije mi lebna lo rupnu do**
> _I give the book to-you, and I take some currency-units from-you._

In [Example 14.52](/en/books/cll/14/#ex-14-52), the first and last sumti of each bridi are identical; the selbri and the second sumti are different. By moving the final sumti to the beginning, a form analogous to [Example 14.50](/en/books/cll/14/#ex-14-50) can be achieved:

<span id="ex-14-53"></span><span id="example-random-id-Evo4"></span>
> **fi do fa mi dunda le cukta**
> _to/from you - I give the book_

where the **fi** does not have an exact English translation because it merely places **do** in the third place of both **lebna** and **dunda**. However, a form that preserves natural sumti order also exists in Lojban. Giheks connect two bridi-tails, but also allow sumti to be added following the bridi-tail. These sumti are known as tail-terms, and apply to both bridi. The straightforward gihek version of [Example 14.52](/en/books/cll/14/#ex-14-52) therefore is:

<span id="ex-14-54"></span><span id="example-random-id-DYBN"></span>
> **mi dunda le cukta gi'e lebna lo rupnu vau do**
> _I (give the book) and (take some currency-units) - to/from-you._

The **vau** (of selma'o VAU) serves to separate the bridi-tail from the tail-terms. Every bridi-tail is terminated by an elidable **vau**, but only in connection with compound bridi is it ever necessary to express this **vau**. Thus:

<span id="ex-14-55"></span><span id="example-random-id-L3eN"></span>
> **mi klama le zarci [vau]**
> _I go-to the market._

has a single elided **vau**, and [Example 14.50](/en/books/cll/14/#ex-14-50) is equivalent to:

<span id="ex-14-56"></span><span id="example-random-id-RfIR"></span>
where the double **vau** at the end of [Example 14.56](/en/books/cll/14/#ex-14-56) terminates both the right-hand bridi-tail and the unexpressed tail-terms.

A final use of giheks is to combine bridi-tails used as complete sentences, the Lojban observative:

<span id="ex-14-57"></span><span id="example-random-id-rvUD"></span>
> **klama le zarci gi'e dzukla le briju**
> _A-goer to-the market and a-walker to-the office._

Since x₁ is omitted in both of the bridi underlying [Example 14.57](/en/books/cll/14/#ex-14-57), this compound bridi does not necessarily imply that the goer and the walker are the same. Only the presence of an explicit x₁ (other than **zo'e**, which is equivalent to omission) can force the goer and the walker to be identical.

A strong argument for this convention is provided by analysis of the following example:

<span id="ex-14-58"></span><span id="example-random-id-cBrg"></span>
> **klama la nu,IORK.**
> _A-goer to-that-named New-York_

If the rule were that the x₁ places of the two underlying bridi were considered identical, then (since there is nothing special about x₁), the unspecified x₄ (route) and x₅ (means) places would also have to be the same, leading to the absurd result that the route from Phoenix to New York is the same as the route from Rome to New York. Inserting **da**, meaning roughly _something_, into the x₁ place cures the problem:

<span id="ex-14-59"></span><span id="example-random-id-ij9G"></span>
> **da klama la nu,IORK. la finyks.**
> _Something is-a-goer to-that-named New-York from-that-named Phoenix_

The syntax of giheks is:

which is exactly parallel to the syntax of eks.

<span id="sec-14-10"></span><span id="section-multiple-compound-bridi"></span>
### Multiple compound bridi

Giheks can be combined with **bo** in the same way as eks:

<span id="ex-14-60"></span><span id="example-random-id-DpCN"></span>
> **mi nelci la djan. gi'e nelci la martas. gi'abo nelci la meris.**
> _I like John and ( like Martha or like Mary )._

is equivalent in meaning to [Example 14.39](/en/books/cll/14/#ex-14-39) and [Example 14.40](/en/books/cll/14/#ex-14-40). Likewise, **ke**…**ke'e** grouping can be used after giheks:

<span id="ex-14-61"></span><span id="example-random-id-rH4n"></span>
> **mi dzukla le zarci**
> _I walk-to the market_

is the gihek version of [Example 14.47](/en/books/cll/14/#ex-14-47). The same rule about using **ke**…**ke'e** bracketing only just after a connective applies to bridi-tails as to sumti, so the first two bridi-tails in [Example 14.61](/en/books/cll/14/#ex-14-61) cannot be explicitly grouped; implicit left-grouping suffices to associate them.

Each of the pairs of bridi-tails joined by multiple giheks can have its own set of tail-terms:

<span id="ex-14-62"></span><span id="example-random-id-1asY"></span>
> **- mi dejni lo rupnu la djan.**
> _[If] I owe some currency-units to-that-named John,_

is equivalent in meaning to:

<span id="ex-14-63"></span><span id="example-random-id-901t"></span>
> **- mi dejni lo rupnu nagi'a dunda**
> _[If] I owe some currency-units then (give_

The literal English translation in [Example 14.63](/en/books/cll/14/#ex-14-63) is almost unintelligible, but the Lojban is perfectly grammatical. **mi** fills the x₁ place of all three selbri; **lo rupnu** is the x₂ of **dejni**, whereas **le cukta** is a tail-term shared between **dunda** and **lebna**; **la djan.** is a tail-term shared by **dejni** and by **dunda gi'abo lebna**. In this case, greater clarity is probably achieved by moving **la djan.** to the beginning of the sentence, as in [Example 14.53](/en/books/cll/14/#ex-14-53):

<span id="ex-14-64"></span><span id="example-random-id-7NnV"></span>
> **fi la djan. - fa mi dejni lo rupnu**
> _To/from that-named John, [if] - I owe some currency-units_

Finally, what about forethought logical connection of bridi-tails? There is no direct mechanism for the purpose. Instead, Lojban grammar allows a pair of forethought-connected sentences to function as a single bridi-tail, and of course the sentences need not have terms before their selbri. For example:

<span id="ex-14-65"></span><span id="example-random-id-4gJC"></span>
> **mi ge klama le zarci gi nelci la djan.**
> _I both go-to the market and like that-named John._

is equivalent in meaning to [Example 14.50](/en/books/cll/14/#ex-14-50).

Of course, either of the connected sentences may contain giheks:

<span id="ex-14-66"></span><span id="example-random-id-mInd"></span>
> **mi ge klama le zarci gi'e dzukla le zdani**
> _I both (go to-the market and walk to-the house)_

The entire gek-connected sentence pair may be negated as a whole by prefixing **na**:

<span id="ex-14-67"></span><span id="example-random-id-DzgI"></span>
> **- mi na ge klama le zarci gi dzukla le zdani**
> _[False!] I - both go-to the market and walk-to the house._

Since a pair of sentences joined by geks is the equivalent of a bridi-tail, it may be followed by tail terms. The forethought equivalent of [Example 14.54](/en/books/cll/14/#ex-14-54) is:

<span id="ex-14-68"></span><span id="example-random-id-BUsi"></span>
> **mi ge dunda le cukta**
> _I both (give the book)_

Here is a pair of gek-connected observatives, a forethought equivalent of [Example 14.57](/en/books/cll/14/#ex-14-57):

<span id="ex-14-69"></span><span id="example-random-id-C5Wc"></span>
> **ge klama le zarci gi dzukla le briju**
> _Both a-goer to-the market and a-walker to-the office._

Finally, here is an example of gek-connected sentences with both shared and unshared terms before their selbri:

<span id="ex-14-70"></span><span id="example-random-id-eJyK"></span>
> **mi gonai le zarci cu klama gi le bisli cu dansu**
> _I either-but-not-both to-the office - go or on-the ice - dance._
> _I either go to the office or dance on the ice (but not both)._

<span id="sec-14-11"></span><span id="section-termsets"></span>
### Termset logical connection

So far we have seen sentences that differ in all components, and require bridi connection; sentences that differ in one sumti only, and permit sumti connection; and sentences that differ in the selbri and possibly one or more sumti, and permit bridi-tail connection. Termset logical connectives are employed for sentences that differ in more than one sumti but not in the selbri, such as:

<span id="ex-14-71"></span><span id="example-random-id-G02C"></span>
> _I go to the market from the office and to the house from the school._

The Lojban version of [Example 14.71](/en/books/cll/14/#ex-14-71) requires two termsets joined by a logical connective. A _term_ is either a sumti or a sumti preceded by a tense or modal tag such as **pu** or **bai**. Afterthought termsets are formed by linking terms together by inserting the cmavo **ce'e** (of selma'o CEhE) between each of them. Furthermore, the logical connective (which is a jek) must be prefixed by the cmavo **pe'e** (of selma'o PEhE). (We could refer to the combination of **pe'e** and a jek as a _pehejek_, I suppose.)

<span id="ex-14-72"></span><span id="example-random-id-UVPj"></span>
> **mi klama le zarci ce'e le briju**
> _I go to-the market [plus] from-the office_

The literal translation uses _[plus]_ to indicate the termset connective, and _[joint]_ to indicate the position of the logical connective joint. As usual, there is an equivalent bridi-connection form:

<span id="ex-14-73"></span><span id="example-random-id-Bp2v"></span>
> **mi klama le zarci le briju**
> _I go to-the market from-the office,_

which illustrates that the two bridi differ in the x₂ and x₃ places only.

What happens if the two joined sets of terms are of unequal length? Expanding to bridi connection will always make clear which term goes in which place of which bridi. It can happen that a sumti may fall in the x₂ place of one bridi and the x₃ place of another:

<span id="ex-14-74"></span><span id="example-random-id-yYsr"></span>
> **mi pe'e ja do ce'e le zarci cu klama le briju**
> _I [joint] or you [plus] to-the market - go to/from-the office._

can be clearly understood by expansion to:

<span id="ex-14-75"></span><span id="example-random-id-NIuS"></span>
> **mi klama le briju .ija do le zarci cu klama**
> _I go to-the office, or you to-the market - go_

So **le briju** is your origin but my destination, and thus falls in the x₂ and x₃ places of **klama** simultaneously! This is legal because even though there is only one selbri, **klama**, there are two distinct bridi expressed here. In addition, **mi** in [Example 14.74](/en/books/cll/14/#ex-14-74) is serving as a termset containing only one term. An analogous paradox applies to compound bridi with tail-terms and unequal numbers of sumti within the connected bridi-tails:

<span id="ex-14-76"></span><span id="example-random-id-zsiy"></span>
> **mi -- klama le zarci gi'e dzukla vau le briju**
> _I ( go to-the market and walk ) to/from-the office._

means that I go to the market from the office, and I walk to the office; **le briju** is the x₃ place of **klama** and the x₂ place of **dzukla**.

Forethought termsets also exist, and use **nu'i** of selma'o NUhI to signal the beginning and **nu'u** of selma'o NUhU (an elidable terminator) to signal the end. Nothing is inserted between the individual terms: they simply sit side-by-side. To make a logical connection in a forethought termset, use a gek, with the gek just after the **nu'i**, and an extra **nu'u** just before the gik:

<span id="ex-14-77"></span><span id="example-random-id-KeLv"></span>
> **mi klama nu'i ge le zarci le briju**
> _I go [start-termset] both to-the market from-the office_

Note that even though two termsets are being connected, only one **nu'i** is used.

The grammatical uses of termsets that do not contain logical connectives are explained in [Sec. 9.8](/en/books/cll/9/#sec-9-8), [Sec. 10.25](/en/books/cll/10/#sec-10-25), and [Sec. 16.7](/en/books/cll/16/#sec-16-7).

<span id="sec-14-12"></span><span id="section-tanru"></span>
### Logical connection within tanru

As noted at the beginning of [Sec. 14.9](/en/books/cll/14/#sec-14-9), there is no logical connective in Lojban that joins selbri and nothing but selbri. However, it is possible to have logical connectives within a selbri, forming a kind of tanru that involves a logical connection. Consider the simple tanru **blanu zdani**, blue house. Now anything that is a blue ball, in the most ordinary understanding of the phrase at least, is both blue and a ball. And indeed, instead of **blanu bolci**, Lojbanists can say **blanu je bolci**, using a jek connective within the tanru. (We saw jeks used in [Sec. 14.11](/en/books/cll/14/#sec-14-11) also, but there they were always prefixed by **pe'e**; in this section they are used alone.) Here is a pair of examples:

<span id="ex-14-78"></span><span id="example-random-id-qGoH"></span>
> **ti blanu zdani**
> _This is-a-blue-type-of house._

<span id="ex-14-79"></span><span id="example-random-id-qgoW"></span>
> **ti blanu je zdani**
> _This is-blue and is-a-house._

But of course [Example 14.78](/en/books/cll/14/#ex-14-78) and [Example 14.79](/en/books/cll/14/#ex-14-79) are not necessarily equivalent in meaning! It is the most elementary point about Lojban tanru that [Example 14.78](/en/books/cll/14/#ex-14-78) might just as well mean

<span id="ex-14-80"></span><span id="example-random-id-DxVB"></span>
> _This is a house for blue inhabitants._

and [Example 14.79](/en/books/cll/14/#ex-14-79) certainly is not equivalent in meaning to [Example 14.80](/en/books/cll/14/#ex-14-80).

A full explanation of logical connection within tanru belongs rather to a discussion of selbri structure than to logical connectives in general. Why? Because although [Example 14.79](/en/books/cll/14/#ex-14-79) happens to mean the same as

<span id="ex-14-81"></span><span id="example-random-id-XXX6"></span>
and therefore as

<span id="ex-14-82"></span><span id="example-random-id-HqYS"></span>
the rule of expansion into separate bridi simply does not always work for tanru connection. Supposing Alice to be a person who lives in blue houses, then

<span id="ex-14-83"></span><span id="example-random-id-DG5K"></span>
> **la .alis. cu - blanu je zdani - prenu**
> _That-named Alice - is-a-( blue and house ) type-of-person._

would be true, because tanru grouping with a jek has higher precedence than unmarked tanru grouping, but:

<span id="ex-14-84"></span><span id="example-random-id-eh2i"></span>
> **la .alis. cu - blanu prenu**
> _That-named Alice - is-a blue person,_

is probably false, because the blueness is associated with the house, not with Alice, even leaving aside the question of what it means to say _Alice is a blue person_. (Perhaps she belongs to the Blue team, or is wearing blue clothes.) The semantic ambiguity of tanru make such logical manipulations impossible.

It suffices to note here, then, a few purely grammatical points about tanru logical connection. **bo** may be appended to jeks as to eks, with the same rules:

<span id="ex-14-85"></span><span id="example-random-id-RNMY"></span>
> **la teris. cu ricfu je nakni jabo fetsi**
> _That-named Terry - is-rich and (male or female)._

The components of tanru may be grouped with **ke** both before and after a logical connective:

<span id="ex-14-86"></span><span id="example-random-id-JdID"></span>
> **la .teris. cu [ke] ricfu ja pindi [ke'e]**
> _That-named Terry - ( is-rich or is-poor )_

where the first **ke**…**ke'e** pair may be omitted altogether by the rule of left-grouping, but is optionally permitted. In any case, the last instance of **ke'e** may be elided.

The syntax of jeks is:

parallel to eks and giheks.

Forethought tanru connection does not use geks, but uses guheks instead. Guheks have exactly the same form as geks:

Using guheks in tanru connection (rather than geks) resolves what would otherwise be an unacceptable ambiguity between bridi-tail and tanru connection:

<span id="ex-14-87"></span><span id="example-random-id-mjog"></span>
> **la .alis. gu'e ricfu gi fetsi**
> _That-named Alice is-both rich and female._

Note that giks are used with guheks in exactly the same way they are used with geks. Like jeks, guheks bind more closely than unmarked tanru grouping does:

<span id="ex-14-88"></span><span id="example-random-id-Gyrc"></span>
> **la .alis. gu'e blanu gi zdani prenu**
> _That-named Alice is-a-(both blue and a-house) type-of-person._

is the forethought version of [Example 14.83](/en/books/cll/14/#ex-14-83).

A word of caution about the use of logically connected tanru within descriptions. English-based intuition can lead the speaker astray. In correctly reducing

<span id="ex-14-89"></span><span id="example-random-id-8wbd"></span>
> **mi viska pa nanmu .ije mi viska pa ninmu**
> _I see a man, and I see a woman._

to

<span id="ex-14-90"></span><span id="example-random-id-qf3n"></span>
> **mi viska pa nanmu .e pa ninmu**
> _I see a man and a woman._

there is a great temptation to reduce further to:

<span id="ex-14-91"></span><span id="example-random-id-ag8r"></span>
> **mi viska pa nanmu je ninmu**
> _I see a man and woman._

But [Example 14.91](/en/books/cll/14/#ex-14-91) means that you see one thing which is both a man and a woman simultaneously! A **nanmu je ninmu** is a manwoman, a presumably non-existent creature who is both a **nanmu** and a **ninmu**.

<span id="sec-14-13"></span><span id="section-truth-and-connective-questions"></span>
### Truth questions and connective questions

So far we have addressed only sentences which are statements. Lojban, like all human languages, needs also to deal with sentences which are questions. There are many ways of asking questions in Lojban, but some of these (like questions about quantity, tense, and emotion) are discussed in other chapters.

The simplest kind of question is of the type _Is it true that ..._ where some statement follows. This type is called a _truth question_, and can be represented in English by [Example 14.92](/en/books/cll/14/#ex-14-92):

<span id="ex-14-92"></span><span id="example-random-id-bMjE"></span>
> _Is it true that Fido is a dog?_
> _Is Fido a dog?_

Note the two formulations. English truth questions can always be formed by prefixing _Is is true that_ to the beginning of a statement; there is also usually a more idiomatic way involving putting the verb before its subject. _Is Fido a dog?_ is the truth question corresponding to _Fido is a dog_. In Lojban, the equivalent mechanism is to prefix the cmavo **xu** (of selma'o UI) to the statement:

<span id="ex-14-93"></span><span id="example-random-id-gKaM"></span>
> **xu la faidon. gerku**
> _Is-it-true-that that-named Fido is-a-dog?_

[Example 14.92](/en/books/cll/14/#ex-14-92) and [Example 14.93](/en/books/cll/14/#ex-14-93) are equivalent in meaning.

A truth question can be answered _yes_ or _no_, depending on the truth or falsity, respectively, of the underlying statement. The standard way of saying _yes_ in Lojban is **go'i** and of saying _no_ is **na****go'i**. (The reasons for this rule are explained in [Sec. 7.6](/en/books/cll/7/#sec-7-6).) In answer to [Example 14.93](/en/books/cll/14/#ex-14-93), the possible answers are:

<span id="ex-14-94"></span><span id="example-random-id-XSmq"></span>
> **go'i**
> _Fido is a dog._

and

<span id="ex-14-95"></span><span id="example-random-id-WI3P"></span>
> **nago'i**
> _Fido is not a dog._

Some English questions seemingly have the same form as the truth questions so far discussed. Consider

<span id="ex-14-96"></span><span id="example-random-id-mftC"></span>
> _Is Fido a dog or a cat?_

Superficially, [Example 14.96](/en/books/cll/14/#ex-14-96) seems like a truth question with the underlying statement:

<span id="ex-14-97"></span><span id="example-random-id-n6Ec"></span>
> _Fido is a dog or a cat._

By translating [Example 14.97](/en/books/cll/14/#ex-14-97) into Lojban and prefixing **xu** to signal a truth question, we get:

<span id="ex-14-98"></span><span id="example-random-id-hz4S"></span>
> **xu la faidon. gerku gi'onai mlatu**
> _Is-it-true-that that-named Fido is-a-dog or is-a-cat (but--not--both)?_

Given that Fido really is either a dog or a cat, the appropriate answer would be **go'i**; if Fido were a fish, the appropriate answer would be **na****go'i**.

But that is not what an English-speaker who utters [Example 14.96](/en/books/cll/14/#ex-14-96) is asking! The true significance of [Example 14.96](/en/books/cll/14/#ex-14-96) is that the speaker desires to know the truth value of either of the two underlying bridi (it is presupposed that only one is true).

Lojban has an elegant mechanism for rendering this kind of question which is very unlike that used in English. Instead of asking about the truth value of the connected bridi, Lojban users ask about the truth function which connects them. This is done by using a special question cmavo: there is one of these for each of the logical connective selma'o, as shown by the following table:

<table>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>**ge'i**</td>
<td>`GA`</td>
<td>forethought connective question</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>**gi'i**</td>
<td>`GIhA`</td>
<td>bridi-tail connective question</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>**gu'i**</td>
<td>`GUhA`</td>
<td>tanru forethought connective question</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>**je'i**</td>
<td>`JA`</td>
<td>tanru connective question</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>**ji**</td>
<td>`A`</td>
<td>sumti connective question</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

(This list unfortunately departs from the pretty regularity of the other cmavo for logical connection. The two-syllable selma'o, GIhA and GUhA, make use of the cmavo ending in _-i_ which is not used for a truth function, but **gi** and **i** were not available, and different cmavo had to be chosen. This table must simply be memorized, like most other non-connective cmavo assignments.)

One correct translation of [Example 14.96](/en/books/cll/14/#ex-14-96) employs a question gihek:

<span id="ex-14-99"></span><span id="example-random-id-G1Xs"></span>
> **la .alis. gerku gi'i mlatu**
> _That-named Alice is-a-dog [truth-function?] is-a-cat?_

Here are some plausible answers:

<span id="ex-14-100"></span><span id="example-random-id-qGPp"></span>
> **nagi'e**
> _Alice is not a dog and is a cat._

<span id="ex-14-101"></span><span id="example-random-id-qGPq"></span>
> **gi'enai**
> _Alice is a dog and is not a cat._

<span id="ex-14-102"></span><span id="example-random-id-qgrw"></span>
> **nagi'enai**
> _Alice is not a dog and is not a cat._

<span id="ex-14-103"></span><span id="example-random-id-qGRz"></span>
> **nagi'o**
> _Alice is a dog or is a cat but not both (I'm not saying which)._

[Example 14.103](/en/books/cll/14/#ex-14-103) is correct but uncooperative.

As usual, Lojban questions are answered by filling in the blank left by the question. Here the blank is a logical connective, and therefore it is grammatical in Lojban to utter a bare logical connective without anything for it to connect.

The answer **gi'e**, meaning that Alice is a dog and is a cat, is impossible in the real world, but for:

<span id="ex-14-104"></span><span id="example-random-id-xtIf"></span>
> **do djica tu'a loi ckafi**
> _You desire something-about a-mass-of coffee_

the answer **e**, meaning that I want both, is perfectly plausible, if not necessarily polite.

The forethought questions **ge'i** and **gu'i** are used like the others, but ambiguity forbids the use of isolated forethought connectives as answers – they sound like the start of forethought-connected bridi. So although [Example 14.105](/en/books/cll/14/#ex-14-105) is the forethought version of [Example 14.104](/en/books/cll/14/#ex-14-104):

<span id="ex-14-105"></span><span id="example-random-id-286J"></span>
> **do djica tu'a ge'i loi ckafi**
> _You desire something-about [truth-function?] a-mass-of coffee_

the answer must be in afterthought form.

There are natural languages, notably Chinese, which employ the Lojbanic form of connective question. The Chinese sentence

<span id="ex-14-106"></span><span id="example-random-id-HyVv"></span>
means _Do you walk or run?_, and is exactly parallel to the Lojban:

<span id="ex-14-107"></span><span id="example-random-id-3jIq"></span>
> **do cadzu gi'i bajra**
> _You walk [or?] run?_

However, Chinese does not use logical connectives in the reply to such a question, so the resemblance, though striking, is superficial.

Truth questions may be used in bridi connection. This form of sentence is perfectly legitimate, and can be interpreted by using the convention that a truth question is true if the answer is _yes_ and false if the answer is **no**. Analogously, an imperative sentence (involving the special pro-sumti **ko**, which means _you_ but marks the sentence as a command) is true if the command is obeyed, and false otherwise. A request of Abraham Lincoln's may be translated thus:

<span id="ex-14-108"></span><span id="example-random-id-BPv0"></span>
> **ganai ti ckafi gi ko bevri loi tcati mi**
> _If this is-coffee then [you!] bring a-mass-of tea to-me,_

In logical terms, however, _but_ is the same as _and_; the difference is that the sentence after a _but_ is felt to be in tension or opposition to the sentence before it. Lojban represents this distinction by adding the discursive cmavo **ku'i** (of selma'o UI), which is explained in [Sec. 13.12](/en/books/cll/13/#sec-13-12), to the logical **.i****je**.)

<span id="sec-14-14"></span><span id="section-non-logical-connectives"></span>
### Non-logical connectives

Way back in [Sec. 14.1](/en/books/cll/14/#sec-14-1), the point was made that not every use of English _and_, _if ... then_, and so on represents a Lojban logical connective. In particular, consider the _and_ of:

<span id="ex-14-109"></span><span id="example-random-id-x6JW"></span>
> _John and Alice carried the piano._

Given the nature of pianos, this probably means that John carried one end and Alice the other. So it is not true that:

<span id="ex-14-110"></span><span id="example-random-id-58yv"></span>
> _John carried the piano, and Alice carried the piano._

which would mean that each of them carried the piano by himself/herself. Lojban deals with this particular linguistic phenomenon as a _mass_. John and Alice are joined together into a mass, John-and-Alice, and it is this mass which carried the piano, not either of them separately. The cmavo **joi** (of selma'o JOI) is used to join two or more components into a mass:

<span id="ex-14-111"></span><span id="example-random-id-pC5x"></span>
> **la djan. joi la .alis. cu bevri le pipno**
> _That-named John massed-with that-named Alice - carry the piano._

[Example 14.111](/en/books/cll/14/#ex-14-111) covers the case mentioned, where John and Alice divide the labor; it also could mean that John did all the hauling and Alice did the supervising. This possibility arises because the properties of a mass are the properties of its components, which can lead to apparent contradictions: if John is small and Alice is large, then John-and-Alice is both small and large. Masses are also discussed in [Sec. 6.3](/en/books/cll/6/#sec-6-3).

Grammatically, **joi** can appear between two sumti (like an ek) or between two tanru components (like a jek). This flexibility must be paid for in the form of occasional terminators that cannot be elided:

<span id="ex-14-112"></span><span id="example-random-id-NN93"></span>
> **le nanmu ku joi le ninmu [ku] cu klama le zarci**
> _The man - massed-with the woman - - go-to the market._

The cmavo **ku** is the elidable terminator for **le**, which can almost always be elided, but not in this case. If the first **ku** were elided here, Lojban's parsing rules would see **le nanmu joi** and assume that another tanru component is to follow; since the second **le** cannot be part of a tanru, a parsing error results. No such problem can occur with logical connectives, because an ek signals a following sumti and a jek a following tanru component unambiguously.

Single or compound cmavo involving members of selma'o JOI are called joiks, by analogy with the names for logical connectives. It is not grammatical to use joiks to connect bridi-tails.

In tanru, **joi** has the connotation _mixed with_, as in the following example:

<span id="ex-14-113"></span><span id="example-random-id-Xxp2"></span>
> **ti blanu joi xunre bolci**
> _This is-a-(blue mixed-with red) ball._
> _This is a blue and red ball._

Here the ball is neither wholly blue nor wholly red, but partly blue and partly red. Its blue/redness is a mass property. (Just how blue something has to be to count as _wholly blue_ is an unsettled question, though. A **blanu zdani** may be so even though not every part of it is blue.)

There are several other cmavo in selma'o JOI which can be used in the same grammatical constructions. Not all of them are well-defined as yet in all contexts. All have clear definitions as sumti connectives; those definitions are shown in the following table:

<table>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>A joi B</td>
<td>the mass with components A and B</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>A ce B</td>
<td>the set with elements A and B</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>A ce&#x27;o B</td>
<td>the sequence with elements A and B in order</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>A sece&#x27;o B</td>
<td>the sequence with elements B and A in order</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>A jo&#x27;u B</td>
<td>A and B considered jointly</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>A fa&#x27;u B</td>
<td>A and B respectively</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>A sefa&#x27;u B</td>
<td>B and A respectively</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>A jo&#x27;e B</td>
<td>the union of sets A and B</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>A ku&#x27;a B</td>
<td>the intersection of sets A and B</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>A pi&#x27;u B</td>
<td>the cross product of sets A and B</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>A sepi&#x27;u B</td>
<td>the cross product of sets B and A</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

The cmavo **se** is grammatical before any JOI cmavo, but only useful with those that have inherent order. Here are some examples of joiks:

<span id="ex-14-114"></span><span id="example-random-id-cwG8"></span>
> **mi cuxna la .alis. la frank.**
> _I choose that-named Alice from-that-named Frank_

The x₃ place of **cuxna** is a set from which the choice is being made. A set is an abstract object which is determined by specifying its members. Unlike those of a mass, the properties of a set are unrelated to its members' properties: the set of all rats is large (since many rats exist), but the rats themselves are small. This chapter does not attempt to explain set theory (the mathematical study of sets) in detail: explaining propositional logic is quite enough for one chapter!

In [Example 14.114](/en/books/cll/14/#ex-14-114) we specify that set by listing the members with **ce** joining them.

<span id="ex-14-115"></span><span id="example-random-id-Emw0"></span>
> **ti liste mi ce'o do ce'o la djan.**
> _This is-a-list-of me and-sequence you and-sequence that-named John._
> _This is a list of you, me, and John._

The x₂ place of **liste** is a sequence of the things which are mentioned in the list. (It is worth pointing out that **lo liste** means a physical object such as a grocery list: a purely abstract list is **lo porsi**, a sequence.) Here the three sumti connected by **ce'o** are in a definite order, not just lumped together in a set or a mass.

So **joi**, **ce**, and **ce'o** are parallel, in that the sumti connected are taken to be individuals, and the result is something else: a mass, a set, or a sequence respectively. The cmavo **jo'u** serves as a fourth element in this pattern: the sumti connected are individuals, and the result is still individuals – but inseparably so. The normal Lojban way of saying that James and George are brothers is:

<span id="ex-14-116"></span><span id="example-random-id-sy2V"></span>
> **la djeimyz. bruna la djordj.**
> _That-named James is-the-brother-of that-named George._

possibly adding a discursive element meaning _and vice versa_. However, _James and George are brothers_ cannot be correctly translated as:

<span id="ex-14-117"></span><span id="example-random-id-1PHN"></span>
> **la djeimyz. .e la djordj. bruna**
> _That-named James and that-named George is-a-brother._

since that expands to two bridi and means that James is a brother and so is George, but not necessarily of each other. If the **e** is changed to **jo'u**, however, the meaning of [Example 14.116](/en/books/cll/14/#ex-14-116) is preserved:

<span id="ex-14-118"></span><span id="example-random-id-gnwy"></span>
> **la djeimyz. jo'u**
> _That-named James in-common-with that-named_

The tanru **remei bruna** is not strictly necessary in this sentence, but is used to make clear that we are not saying that James and George are both brothers of some third person not specified. Alternatively, we could turn the tanru around: the x₁ place of **re****mei** is a mass with two components, leading to:

<span id="ex-14-119"></span><span id="example-random-id-t0FJ"></span>
> **la djeimyz. joi**
> _That-named James massed-with_

where **joi** is used to create the necessary mass.

Likewise, **fa'u** can be used to put two individuals together where order matters. Typically, there will be another **fa'u** somewhere else in the same bridi:

<span id="ex-14-120"></span><span id="example-random-id-MBsp"></span>
> **la djeimyz. fa'u la djordj.**
> _That-named James jointly-in-order-with that-named George_

Here the information carried by the English adverb _respectively_, namely that James loves Mary and George loves Martha, is divided between the two occurrences of **fa'u**. If both uses of **fa'u** were to be changed to **e**, we would get:

<span id="ex-14-121"></span><span id="example-random-id-7bv3"></span>
> **la djeimyz. .e la djordj. prami**
> _That-named James and that-named George love_

which can be transformed to four bridi:

<span id="ex-14-122"></span><span id="example-random-id-I3gH"></span>
> **la djeimyz. prami la meris. .ije la djordj. prami**
> _That-named James loves that-named Mary, and that-named George loves_

which represents quite a different state of affairs from [Example 14.120](/en/books/cll/14/#ex-14-120). The meaning of [Example 14.120](/en/books/cll/14/#ex-14-120) can also be conveyed by a termset:

<span id="ex-14-123"></span><span id="example-random-id-nER7"></span>
> **la djeimyz. ce'e la meris. pe'e**
> _That-named James [plus] that-named Mary [joint]_

at the expense of re-ordering the list of names so as to make the pairs explicit. This option is not available when one of the lists is only described rather than enumerated:

<span id="ex-14-124"></span><span id="example-random-id-1r61"></span>
> **la djeimyz. fa'u la djordj. prami re mensi**
> _That-named James and-respectively that-named George love two sisters._

which conveys that James loves one sister and George the other, though we are not able to tell which of the sisters is which.

<span id="sec-14-15"></span><span id="section-non-logical-continued"></span>
### More about non-logical connectives

The final three JOI cmavo, **jo'e**, **ku'a**, and **pi'u**, are probably only useful when talking explicitly about sets. They represent three standard set operators usually called _union_, _intersection_, and _cross product_ (also known as _Cartesian product_). The union of two sets is a set containing all the members that are in either set; the intersection of two sets is a set containing all the members that are in both sets. The cross product of two sets is the set of all possible ordered pairs, where each ordered pair contains a single element from the first set followed by a single element from the second. This may seem very abstract; hopefully, the following examples will help:

<span id="ex-14-125"></span><span id="example-random-id-qGSA"></span>
> **lo'i ricfu ku jo'e lo'i dotco cu barda**
> _The-set-of rich-things - union the-set-of German-things - is-large._

<span id="ex-14-126"></span><span id="example-random-id-qgSe"></span>
> **lo'i ricfu ku ku'a lo'i dotco cu cmalu**
> _The-set-of rich-things - intersection the-set-of German-things - is-small._

There is a parallelism between logic and set theory that makes [Example 14.125](/en/books/cll/14/#ex-14-125) and [Example 14.126](/en/books/cll/14/#ex-14-126) equivalent respectively to:

<span id="ex-14-127"></span><span id="example-random-id-azCQ"></span>
> **lo'i ricfu ja dotco cu barda**
> _The-set-of (rich-things or German-things) - is-large._

and

<span id="ex-14-128"></span><span id="example-random-id-QjD7"></span>
> **lo'i ricfu je dotco cu cmalu**
> _The-set-of (rich-things and German-things) - is-small._

The following example uses **se remei**, which is a set (not a mass) of two elements:

<span id="ex-14-129"></span><span id="example-random-id-D9gz"></span>
> **la djeimyz. ce[bo] la djordj. pi'u**
> _That-named James and-set that-named George cross-product_

means that each of the pairs James/Mary, George/Mary, James/Martha, and George/Martha love each other. Therefore it is similar in meaning to [Example 14.121](/en/books/cll/14/#ex-14-121); however, that example speaks only of the men loving the women, not vice versa.

Joiks may be combined with **bo** or with **ke** in the same way as eks and jeks; this allows grouping of non-logical connections between sumti and tanru units, in complete parallelism with logical connections:

<span id="ex-14-130"></span><span id="example-random-id-mwpo"></span>
> **mi joibo do ce la djan. joibo la djein.**
> _(I massed-with you) and (that-named John massed-with that-named Jane)_

asserts that there is a set of two items each of which is a mass.

Non-logical connection is permitted at the joint of a termset; this is useful for associating more than one sumti or tagged sumti with each side of the non-logical connection. The place structure of **casnu** is:

so the x₁ place must be occupied by a mass (for reasons not explained here); however, different components of the mass may discuss in different languages. To associate each participant with his or her language, we can say:

<span id="ex-14-131"></span><span id="example-random-id-sdba"></span>
> **mi ce'e bau la lojban. pe'e joi**
> _(I [plus] in-language that-named Lojban [joint] massed-with_

Like all non-logical connectives, the usage shown in [Example 14.131](/en/books/cll/14/#ex-14-131) cannot be mechanically converted into a non-logical connective placed at another location in the bridi. The forethought equivalent of [Example 14.131](/en/books/cll/14/#ex-14-131) is:

<span id="ex-14-132"></span><span id="example-random-id-DgXI"></span>
Non-logical forethought termsets are also useful when the things to be non-logically connected are sumti preceded with tense or modal (BAI) tags:

<span id="ex-14-133"></span><span id="example-random-id-wVSG"></span>
> **la djan. fa'u la frank. cusku**
> _That-named John respectively-with that-named Frank express_

[Example 14.133](/en/books/cll/14/#ex-14-133) associates speaking in Lojban with John, and speaking under George's compulsion with Frank. We do not know what language Frank uses, or whether John speaks under anyone's compulsion.

Joiks may be prefixed with **i** to produce ijoiks, which serve to non-logically connect sentences. The ijoik **.i****ce'o** indicates that the event of the second bridi follows that of the first bridi in some way other than a time relationship (which is handled with a tense):

<span id="ex-14-134"></span><span id="example-random-id-27xU"></span>
> **mi ba gasnu la'e di'e .i**
> _I [future] do the-referent-of the-following: -_

[Example 14.134](/en/books/cll/14/#ex-14-134) represents a list of things to be done in priority order. The order is important, hence the need for a sequence connective, but does not necessarily represent a time order (the dog may end up getting walked first). Note the use of **tu'e** and **tu'u** as general brackets around the whole list. This is related to, but distinct from, their use in [Sec. 14.8](/en/books/cll/14/#sec-14-8), because there is no logical connective between the introductory phrase **mi ba gasnu la'edi'e** and the rest. The brackets effectively show how large an utterance the word **di'e**, which means _the following utterance_, refers to.

Similarly, **.i****joi** is used to connect sentences that represent the components of a joint event such as a joint cause: the Lojban equivalent of _Fran hit her head and fell out of the boat, so that she drowned_ would join the events _Fran hit her head_ and _Fran fell out of the boat_ with **.i****joi**.

The following **nai**, if present, does not negate either of the things to be connected, but instead specifies that some other connection (logical or non-logical) is applicable: it is a scalar negation:

<span id="ex-14-135"></span><span id="example-random-id-mMdb"></span>
> **mi jo'u nai do cu remei**
> _I in-common-with [not!] you - are-a-twosome_

The result of **mi jo'u do** would be two individuals, not a mass, therefore **jo'u** is not applicable; **joi** would be the correct connective.

There is no joik question cmavo as such; however, joiks and ijoiks may be uttered in isolation in response to a logical connective question, as in the following exchange:

<span id="ex-14-136"></span><span id="example-random-id-qGSm"></span>
> **do djica tu'a loi ckafi**
> _You desire something-about a-mass-of coffee_

<span id="ex-14-137"></span><span id="example-random-id-qgsp"></span>
> **joi**
> _Mixed-mass-and._
> _Both as a mass (i.e, mixed together)._

Ugh. (Or in Lojban: **.a'u****nai****sai****ro'o**.)

<span id="sec-14-16"></span><span id="section-non-logical-continued-continued"></span>
### Interval connectives and forethought non-logical connection

In addition to the non-logical connectives of selma'o JOI explained in [Sec. 14.14](/en/books/cll/14/#sec-14-14) and [Sec. 14.15](/en/books/cll/14/#sec-14-15), there are three other connectives which can appear in joiks: **bi'i**, **bi'o**, and **mi'i**, all of selma'o BIhI. The first two cmavo are used to specify intervals: abstract objects defined by two endpoints. The cmavo **bi'i** is correct if the endpoints are independent of order, whereas **bi'o** or **se****bi'o** are used when order matters.

An example of **bi'i** in sumti connection:

<span id="ex-14-138"></span><span id="example-random-id-sHhA"></span>
> **mi ca sanli**
> _I [present] stand-on-surface_

In [Example 14.138](/en/books/cll/14/#ex-14-138), it is all the same whether I am standing between Dresden and Frankfurt or between Frankfurt and Dresden, so **bi'i** is the appropriate interval connective. The sumti **la drezdn. bi'i la frankfurt.** falls into the x₂ place of **sanli**, which is the surface I stand on; the interval specifies that surface by its limits. (Obviously, I am not standing on the whole of the interval; the x₂ place of **sanli** specifies a surface which is typically larger in extent than just the size of the stander's feet.)

<span id="ex-14-139"></span><span id="example-random-id-rYv4"></span>
> **mi cadzu ca la pacac.**
> _I walk simultaneous-with - First-hour_

In [Example 14.139](/en/books/cll/14/#ex-14-139), on the other hand, it is essential that **la pacac.** comes before **la recac.**; otherwise we have an 11-hour (or 23-hour) interval rather than a one-hour interval. In this use of an interval, the whole interval is probably intended, or at least most of it.

[Example 14.139](/en/books/cll/14/#ex-14-139) is equivalent to:

<span id="ex-14-140"></span><span id="example-random-id-qqIr"></span>
> **mi cadzu ca la recac.**
> _I walk simultaneous-with - Second-hour_

English cannot readily express **se****bi'o**, but its meaning can be understood by reversing the two sumti.

The third cmavo of selma'o BIhI, namely **mi'i**, expresses an interval seen from a different viewpoint: not a pair of endpoints, but a center point and a distance. For example:

<span id="ex-14-141"></span><span id="example-random-id-wm5E"></span>
> **le jbama pu daspo la .uacintyn.**
> _The bomb [past] destroys - Washington_

Here we have an interval whose center is Washington and whose distance, or radius, is fifty miles.

In [Example 14.138](/en/books/cll/14/#ex-14-138), is it possible that I am standing in Dresden (or Frankfurt) itself? Yes. The connectives of selma'o BIhI are ambiguous about whether the endpoints themselves are included in or excluded from the interval. Two auxiliary cmavo **ga'o** and **ke'i** (of cmavo GAhO) are used to indicate the status of the endpoints: **ga'o** means that the endpoint is included, **ke'i** that it is excluded:

<span id="ex-14-142"></span><span id="example-random-id-qGTc"></span>
> **mi ca sanli la drezdn. ga'o**
> _I [present] stand that-named Dresden [inclusive]_

<span id="ex-14-143"></span><span id="example-random-id-qGtv"></span>
> **mi ca sanli la drezdn. ga'o**
> _I [present] stand that-named Dresden [inclusive]_

<span id="ex-14-144"></span><span id="example-random-id-qgUo"></span>
> **mi ca sanli la drezdn. ke'i**
> _I [present] stand that-named Dresden [exclusive]_

<span id="ex-14-145"></span><span id="example-random-id-qGvB"></span>
> **mi ca sanli la drezdn. ke'i**
> _I [present] stand that-named Dresden [exclusive]_

As these examples should make clear, the GAhO cmavo that applies to a given endpoint is the one that stands physically adjacent to it: the left-hand endpoint is referred to by the first GAhO, and the right-hand endpoint by the second GAhO. It is ungrammatical to have just one GAhO.

(Etymologically, **ga'o** is derived from **ganlo**, which means _closed_, and **ke'i** from **kalri**, which means _open_. In mathematics, inclusive intervals are referred to as closed intervals, and exclusive intervals as open ones.)

BIhI joiks are grammatical anywhere that other joiks are, including in tanru connection and (as ijoiks) between sentences. No meanings have been found for these uses.

Negated intervals, marked with a **-nai** following the BIhI cmavo, indicate an interval that includes everything but what is between the endpoints (with respect to some understood scale):

<span id="ex-14-146"></span><span id="example-random-id-39EI"></span>
> **do dicra .e'a mi ca la daucac.**
> _You disturb (allowed) me at that-named 10_

The complete syntax of joiks is:

- [se] JOI [nai]
- [se] BIhI [nai]
- GAhO [se] BIhI [nai] GAhO

Notice that the colloquial English translations of **bi'i** and **bi'o** have forethought form: _between ... and_ for **bi'i**, and _from ... to_ for **bi'o**. In Lojban too, non-logical connectives can be expressed in forethought. Rather than using a separate selma'o, the forethought logical connectives are constructed from the afterthought ones by suffixing **gi**. Such a compound cmavo is not unnaturally called a _joigik_; the syntax of joigiks is any of:

- [se] JOI [nai] GI
- [se] BIhI [nai] GI
- GAhO [se] BIhI [nai] GAhO GI

Joigiks may be used to non-logically connect bridi, sumti, and bridi-tails; and also in termsets.

[Example 14.111](/en/books/cll/14/#ex-14-111) in forethought becomes:

<span id="ex-14-147"></span><span id="example-random-id-iBpP"></span>
> **joigi la djan. gi la .alis. bevri le pipno**
> _[Together] that-named John and that-named Alice carry the piano._

The first **gi** is part of the joigik; the second **gi** is the regular gik that separates the two things being connected in all forethought forms.

[Example 14.143](/en/books/cll/14/#ex-14-143) can be expressed in forethought as:

<span id="ex-14-148"></span><span id="example-random-id-u51K"></span>
> **mi ca sanli ke'i bi'i**
> _I [present] stand [exclusive] between_

In forethought, unfortunately, the GAhOs become physically separated from the endpoints, but the same rule applies: the first GAhO refers to the first endpoint.

<span id="sec-14-17"></span><span id="section-mekso-connections"></span>
### Logical and non-logical connectives within mekso

Lojban has a separate grammar embedded within the main grammar for representing mathematical expressions (or mekso in Lojban) such as _2 + 2_. Mathematical expressions are explained fully in [Ch. 18](/en/books/cll/18/#ch-18). The basic components of mekso are operands, like _2_, and operators, like _+_. Both of these may be either logically or non-logically connected.

Operands are connected in afterthought with eks and in forethought with geks, just like sumti. Operators, on the other hand, are connected in afterthought with jeks and in forethought with guheks, just like tanru components. (However, jeks and joiks with **bo** are not allowed for operators.) This parallelism is no accident.

In addition, eks with **bo** and with **ke**…**ke'e** are allowed for grouping logically connected operands, and **ke**…**ke'e** is allowed for grouping logically connected operators, although there is no analogue of tanru among the operators.

Only a few examples of each kind of mekso connection will be given. Despite the large number of rules required to support this feature, it is of relatively minor importance in either the mekso or the logical-connective scheme of things. These examples are drawn from [Sec. 18.17](/en/books/cll/18/#sec-18-17), and contain many mekso features not explained in this chapter.

[Example 14.149](/en/books/cll/14/#ex-14-149) exhibits afterthought logical connection between operands:

<span id="ex-14-149"></span><span id="example-random-id-gMU4"></span>
> **vei ci .a vo [ve'o] prenu cu klama le zarci**
> _( Three or four ) people - go-to the market._

[Example 14.150](/en/books/cll/14/#ex-14-150) is equivalent in meaning, but uses forethought connection:

<span id="ex-14-150"></span><span id="example-random-id-ftNY"></span>
> **vei ga ci gi vo [ve'o] prenu cu klama le zarci**
> _( Either 3 or 4 ) people - go-to the market._

Note that the mekso in [Example 14.149](/en/books/cll/14/#ex-14-149) and [Example 14.150](/en/books/cll/14/#ex-14-150) are being used as quantifiers. Lojban requires that any mekso other than a simple number be enclosed in **vei** and **ve'o** parentheses when used as a quantifier. The right parenthesis mark, **ve'o**, is an elidable terminator.

Simple examples of logical connection between operators are hard to come by. A contrived example is:

<span id="ex-14-151"></span><span id="example-random-id-dCxf"></span>
> **li re su'i je pi'i re du li vo**
> _The-number 2 plus and times 2 equals the-number 4._
> _2 + 2 = 4 and 2 x 2 = 4._

The forethought form of [Example 14.151](/en/books/cll/14/#ex-14-151) is:

<span id="ex-14-152"></span><span id="example-random-id-YBD6"></span>
> **li re gu'e su'i gi pi'i re du li vo**
> _The-number two both plus and times two equals the-number four._
> _Both 2 + 2 = 4 and 2 x 2 = 4._

Non-logical connection with joiks or joigiks is also permitted between operands and between operators. One use for this construct is to connect operands with **bi'i** to create mathematical intervals:

<span id="ex-14-153"></span><span id="example-random-id-z2oF"></span>
> **li no ga'o bi'i ke'i pa**
> _the-number zero (inclusive) from-to (exclusive) one_
> _the numbers from zero to one, including zero but not including one_

You can also combine two operands with **ce'o**, the sequence connective of selma'o JOI, to make a compound subscript:

<span id="ex-14-154"></span><span id="example-random-id-8rEL"></span>
> **xy. boi xi vei by. ce'o dy. [ve'o]**
> __x_ - sub (_b_ sequence _d_)_

Note that the **boi** in [Example 14.154](/en/books/cll/14/#ex-14-154) is not elidable, because the **xi** subscript needs something to attach to.

<span id="sec-14-18"></span><span id="section-sumtcita"></span>
### Tenses, modals, and logical connection

The tense and modal systems of Lojban interact with the logical connective system. No one chapter can explain all of these simultaneously, so each chapter must present its own view of the area of interaction with emphasis on its own concepts and terminology. In the examples of this chapter, the many tenses of various selma'o as well as the modals of selma'o BAI are represented by the simple time cmavo **pu**, **ca**, and **ba** (of selma'o PU) representing the past, the present, and the future respectively. Preceding a selbri, these cmavo state the time when the bridi was, is, or will be true (analogous to English verb tenses); preceding a sumti, they state that the event of the main bridi is before, simultaneous with, or after the event given by the sumti (which is generally a **le nu** abstraction; see [Sec. 11.2](/en/books/cll/11/#sec-11-2)).

The two types of interaction between tenses and logical connectives are logically connected tenses and tensed logical connections. The former are fairly simple. Jeks may be used between tense cmavo to specify two connected bridi that differ only in tense:

<span id="ex-14-155"></span><span id="example-random-id-g6iT"></span>
> **la .artr. pu nolraitru**
> _That-named Arthur [past] is-a-noblest-governor._

can be reduced to:

<span id="ex-14-156"></span><span id="example-random-id-PLgw"></span>
> **la .artr. pu je ba nolraitru**
> _That-named Arthur [past] and [future] is-a-noblest-governor._
> _Arthur was and will be king._

[Example 14.155](/en/books/cll/14/#ex-14-155) and [Example 14.156](/en/books/cll/14/#ex-14-156) are equivalent in meaning; neither says anything about whether Arthur is king now.

Non-logical connection with joiks is also possible between tenses:

<span id="ex-14-157"></span><span id="example-random-id-Mcsi"></span>
> **mi pu bi'o ba vasxu**
> _I [past] from-...-to [future] breathe._
> _I breathe from a past time until a future time._

The full tense system makes more interesting tense intervals expressible, such as _from a medium time ago until a long time from now_.

No forethought connections between tenses are permitted by the grammar, nor is there any way to override the default left-grouping rule; these limitations are imposed to keep the tense grammar simpler. Whatever can be said with tenses or modals can be said with subordinate bridi stating the time, place, or mode explicitly, so it is reasonable to try to remove at least some complications.

Tensed logical connections are both more complex and more important than logical connections between tenses. Consider the English sentence:

<span id="ex-14-158"></span><span id="example-random-id-efav"></span>
> _I went to the market, and I bought food._

The verbatim translation of [Example 14.158](/en/books/cll/14/#ex-14-158), namely:

<span id="ex-14-159"></span><span id="example-random-id-PMTu"></span>
> **mi pu klama le zarci .ije mi pu tervecnu lo cidja**
> _I [past] go-to the market. And I [past] buy items-of food._

fails to fully represent a feature of the English, namely that the buying came after the going. (It also fails to represent that the buying was a consequence of the going, which can be expressed by a modal that is discussed in [Ch. 9](/en/books/cll/9/#ch-9).) However, the tense information – that the event of my going to the market preceded the event of my buying food – can be added to the logical connective as follows. The **.i****je** is replaced by **.i****je****bo**, and the tense cmavo **ba** is inserted between **.i****je** and **bo**:

<span id="ex-14-160"></span><span id="example-random-id-BPG1"></span>
> **mi pu klama le zarci**
> _I [past] go-to the market._

Here the **pu** cmavo in the two bridi-tails express the time of both actions with respect to the speaker: in the past. The **ba** relates the two items to one another: the second item is later than the first item. The grammar does not permit omitting the **bo**; if it were omitted, the **ba** and the second **pu** would run together to form a compound tense **bapu** applying to the second bridi-tail only.

Adding tense or modal information to a logical connective is permitted only in the following situations:

Between an ek (or joik) and **bo**, as in:

<span id="ex-14-161"></span><span id="example-random-id-129L"></span>
> **la .djan .e cabo la .alis. klama le zarci**
> _That-named John and [simultaneous] that-named Alice go-to the market._
> _John and Alice go to the market simultaneously._

Between an ek (or joik) and **ke**, as in:

<span id="ex-14-162"></span><span id="example-random-id-nydK"></span>
> **mi dzukla le zarci .e pu**
> _I walk-to the market and [earlier]_

Between a gihek and **bo**, as in:

<span id="ex-14-163"></span><span id="example-random-id-APPE"></span>
> **mi dunda le cukta gi'e babo**
> _I give the book and [later]_

Between a gihek and **ke**, as in:

<span id="ex-14-164"></span><span id="example-random-id-A0yC"></span>
> **mi dzukla le zarci gi'e ca**
> _I walk-to the market and [simultaneous]_

Between an ijek (or ijoik) and **bo**, as in:

<span id="ex-14-165"></span><span id="example-random-id-AhnP"></span>
> **mi viska pa nanmu .ije babo mi viska pa ninmu**
> _I see a man. And [later] I see a woman._
> _I see a man, and then I see a woman._

Between an ijek (or ijoik) and **tu'e**, as in:

<span id="ex-14-166"></span><span id="example-random-id-GBgP"></span>
> **mi viska pa nanmu .ije batu'e mi viska pa ninmu [tu'u]**
> _I see a man. And [later] I see a woman._
> _I see a man, and then I see a woman._

And finally, between a jek (or joik) and **bo**, as in:

<span id="ex-14-167"></span><span id="example-random-id-Ce09"></span>
> **mi mikce jebabo ricfu**
> _I am-a-doctor and-[later] rich_
> _I am a doctor and future rich person._

As can be seen from [Example 14.165](/en/books/cll/14/#ex-14-165) and [Example 14.166](/en/books/cll/14/#ex-14-166), the choice between **bo** and **ke** (or **tu'e**) is arbitrary when there are only two things to be connected. If there were no tense information to include, of course neither would be required; it is only the rule that tense information must always be sandwiched between the logical connective and a following **bo**, **ke**, or **tu'e** that requires the use of one of these grouping cmavo in [Example 14.161](/en/books/cll/14/#ex-14-161) and [Example 14.163](/en/books/cll/14/#ex-14-163) through [Example 14.167](/en/books/cll/14/#ex-14-167).

Non-logical connectives with **bo** and **ke** can include tense information in exactly the same way as logical connectives. Forethought connectives, however (except as noted below) are unable to do so, as are termsets or tense connectives. Mathematical operands and operators can also include tense information in their logical connectives as a result of their close parallelism with sumti and tanru components respectively:

<span id="ex-14-168"></span><span id="example-random-id-sgUo"></span>
> **vei ci .ebabo vo [ve'o] tadni cu zvati le kumfa**
> _( 3 and-[future] 4 ) students - are-at the room._
> _Three and, later, four students were in the room._

is a simple example. There is a special grammatical rule for use when a tense applies to both of the selbri in a forethought bridi-tail connection: the entire forethought construction can just be preceded by a tense. For example:

<span id="ex-14-169"></span><span id="example-random-id-DxuA"></span>
> **mi pu ge klama le zarci gi tervecnu lo cidja**
> _I [past] both go-to the market and buy some food_
> _I went to the market and bought some food._

[Example 14.169](/en/books/cll/14/#ex-14-169) is similar to [Example 14.159](/en/books/cll/14/#ex-14-159). There is no time relationship specified between the going and the buying; both are simply set in the past.

<span id="sec-14-19"></span><span id="section-abstractors"></span>
### Abstractor connection and connection within abstractions

Last and (as a matter of fact) least: a logical connective is allowed between abstraction markers of selma'o NU. As usual, the connection can be expanded to a bridi connection between two bridi which differ only in abstraction marker. Jeks are the appropriate connective. [Example 14.170](/en/books/cll/14/#ex-14-170) and [Example 14.171](/en/books/cll/14/#ex-14-171) are equivalent in meaning:

<span id="ex-14-170"></span><span id="example-random-id-qGVP"></span>
> **le ka la frank. ciska cu xlali**
> _The quality-of that-named Frank's writing - is-bad,_

<span id="ex-14-171"></span><span id="example-random-id-qgVR"></span>
> **le ka je ni la frank. ciska cu xlali**
> _The quality and quantity of that-named Frank's writing - is-bad._

As with tenses and modals, there is no forethought and no way to override the left-grouping rule.

Logical connectives and abstraction are related in another way as well, though. Since an abstraction contains a bridi, the bridi may have a logical connection inside it. Is it legitimate to split the outer bridi into two, joined by the logical connection? Absolutely not. For example:

<span id="ex-14-172"></span><span id="example-random-id-f1uT"></span>
> **mi jinvi le du'u loi jmive**
> _I opine the fact-that a-mass-of living-things_

is true, since the embedded sentence is a tautology, but:

<span id="ex-14-173"></span><span id="example-random-id-X69J"></span>
> **mi jinvi le du'u loi jmive cu zvati la .iupiter.**
> _I opine the fact-that a-mass-of living-things - is-at that-named Jupiter_

is false, since I have no evidence one way or the other (**jinvi** requires some sort of evidence, real or fancied, unlike **krici**).

<span id="sec-14-20"></span><span id="section-constructs-summary"></span>
### Constructs and appropriate connectives

The following table specifies, for each kind of construct that can be logically or non-logically connected in Lojban, what kind of connective is required for both afterthought and (when possible) forethought modes. An asterisk (*) indicates that tensed connection is permitted.

A dash indicates that connection of the specified type is not possible.

<table>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>construct</td>
<td>afterthought logical</td>
<td>forethought logical</td>
<td>afterthought non-logical</td>
<td>forethought non-logical</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>bridi</td>
<td><a href="/en/books/cll/14/#sec-14-4">ijek*</a></td>
<td><a href="/en/books/cll/14/#sec-14-5">gek</a></td>
<td><a href="/en/books/cll/14/#sec-14-15">ijoik*</a></td>
<td><a href="/en/books/cll/14/#sec-14-16">joigik</a></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>sumti</td>
<td><a href="/en/books/cll/14/#sec-14-6">ek*</a></td>
<td><a href="/en/books/cll/14/#sec-14-6">gek</a></td>
<td><a href="/en/books/cll/14/#sec-14-14">joik*</a></td>
<td><a href="/en/books/cll/14/#sec-14-16">joigik</a></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>bridi-tails</td>
<td><a href="/en/books/cll/14/#sec-14-9">gihek*</a></td>
<td><a href="/en/books/cll/14/#sec-14-10">gek</a></td>
<td>-</td>
<td><a href="/en/books/cll/14/#sec-14-16">joigik</a></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>termsets</td>
<td><a href="/en/books/cll/14/#sec-14-11">ek*</a></td>
<td><a href="/en/books/cll/14/#sec-14-11">gek</a></td>
<td><a href="/en/books/cll/14/#sec-14-11">joik*</a></td>
<td><a href="/en/books/cll/14/#sec-14-11">joigik</a></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>tanru parts</td>
<td><a href="/en/books/cll/14/#sec-14-12">jek</a></td>
<td><a href="/en/books/cll/14/#sec-14-12">guhek</a></td>
<td><a href="/en/books/cll/14/#sec-14-12">joik*</a></td>
<td>-</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>operands</td>
<td><a href="/en/books/cll/14/#sec-14-17">ek*</a></td>
<td><a href="/en/books/cll/14/#sec-14-17">gek</a></td>
<td><a href="/en/books/cll/14/#sec-14-17">joik*</a></td>
<td><a href="/en/books/cll/14/#sec-14-17">joigik</a></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>operators</td>
<td><a href="/en/books/cll/14/#sec-14-17">jek</a></td>
<td><a href="/en/books/cll/14/#sec-14-17">guhek</a></td>
<td><a href="/en/books/cll/14/#sec-14-17">joik</a></td>
<td>-</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>tenses/modals</td>
<td><a href="/en/books/cll/14/#sec-14-18">jek</a></td>
<td>-</td>
<td><a href="/en/books/cll/14/#sec-14-18">joik</a></td>
<td>-</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>abstractors</td>
<td><a href="/en/books/cll/14/#sec-14-19">jek</a></td>
<td>-</td>
<td><a href="/en/books/cll/14/#sec-14-19">joik</a></td>
<td>-</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

<span id="sec-14-21"></span><span id="section-truth-functions-summary"></span>
### Truth functions and corresponding logical connectives

The following table specifies, for each truth function, the most-often used cmavo or compound cmavo which expresses it for each of the six types of logical connective. (Other compound cmavo are often possible: for example, **se****.a** means the same as **a**, and could be used instead.)

<table>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>truth</td>
<td>ek</td>
<td>jek</td>
<td>gihek</td>
<td>gek-gik</td>
<td>guhek-gik</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>TTTF</td>
<td>a</td>
<td>ja</td>
<td>gi&#x27;a</td>
<td>ga-gi</td>
<td>gu&#x27;a-gi</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>TTFT</td>
<td>.anai</td>
<td>janai</td>
<td>gi&#x27;anai</td>
<td>ga-ginai</td>
<td>gu&#x27;a-ginai</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>TTFF</td>
<td>u</td>
<td>ju</td>
<td>gi&#x27;u</td>
<td>gu-gi</td>
<td>gu&#x27;u-gi</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>TFTT</td>
<td>na.a</td>
<td>naja</td>
<td>nagi&#x27;a</td>
<td>ganai-gi</td>
<td>gu&#x27;anai-gi</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>TFTF</td>
<td>se.u</td>
<td>seju</td>
<td>segi&#x27;u</td>
<td>segu-gi</td>
<td>segu&#x27;u-gi</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>TFFT</td>
<td>o</td>
<td>jo</td>
<td>gi&#x27;o</td>
<td>go-gi</td>
<td>gu&#x27;o-gi</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>TFFF</td>
<td>e</td>
<td>je</td>
<td>gi&#x27;e</td>
<td>ge-gi</td>
<td>gu&#x27;e-gi</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>FTTT</td>
<td>na.anai</td>
<td>najanai</td>
<td>nagi&#x27;anai</td>
<td>ganai-ginai</td>
<td>gu&#x27;anai-ginai</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>FTTF</td>
<td>.onai</td>
<td>jonai</td>
<td>gi&#x27;onai</td>
<td>go-ginai</td>
<td>gu&#x27;o-ginai</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>FTFT</td>
<td>se.unai</td>
<td>sejunai</td>
<td>segi&#x27;unai</td>
<td>segu-ginai</td>
<td>segu&#x27;u-ginai</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>FTFF</td>
<td>.enai</td>
<td>jenai</td>
<td>gi&#x27;enai</td>
<td>ge-ginai</td>
<td>gu&#x27;e-ginai</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>FFTT</td>
<td>na.u</td>
<td>naju</td>
<td>nagi&#x27;u</td>
<td>gunai-gi</td>
<td>gu&#x27;unai-gi</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>FFTF</td>
<td>na.e</td>
<td>naje</td>
<td>nagi&#x27;e</td>
<td>genai-gi</td>
<td>gu&#x27;enai-gi</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>FFFT</td>
<td>na.enai</td>
<td>najenai</td>
<td>nagi&#x27;enai</td>
<td>genai-ginai</td>
<td>gu&#x27;enai-ginai</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

Note: ijeks are exactly the same as the corresponding jeks, except for the prefixed **i**.

<span id="sec-14-22"></span><span id="section-construction-summary"></span>
### Rules for making logical and non-logical connectives

The full set of rules for inserting **na**, **se**, and **nai** into any connective is:

Afterthought logical connectives (eks, jeks, giheks, ijeks):

- Negate first construct: Place **na** before the connective cmavo (but after the **i** of an ijek).
- Negate second construct: Place **nai** after the connective cmavo.
- Exchange constructs: Place **se** before the connective cmavo (after **na** if any).

Forethought logical connectives (geks, guheks):

- Negate first construct: Place **nai** after the connective cmavo.
- Negate second construct: Place **nai** after the **gi**.
- Exchange constructs: Place **se** before the connective cmavo.

Non-logical connectives (joiks, joigiks):

- Negate connection: Place **nai** after the connective cmavo (but before the **gi** of a joigik).
- Exchange constructs: Place **se** before the connective cmavo.

<span id="sec-14-23"></span><span id="section-other-tables"></span>
### Locations of other tables

[Sec. 14.1](/en/books/cll/14/#sec-14-1): a table explaining the meaning of each truth function in English.

[Sec. 14.2](/en/books/cll/14/#sec-14-2): a table relating the truth functions to the four basic vowels.

[Sec. 14.13](/en/books/cll/14/#sec-14-13): a table of the connective question cmavo.

[Sec. 14.14](/en/books/cll/14/#sec-14-14): a table of the meanings of JOI cmavo when used to connect sumti.
