## Chapter 18. lojbau mekso: Mathematical Expressions in Lojban

<span id="ch-18"></span><span id="chapter-mekso"></span><span id="chapter-mekso-picture"></span>
<!-- figure: media/chapter-mekso.gif -->

<span id="sec-18-1"></span><span id="section-mekso-introduction"></span>
### Introductory

lojbau mekso (_Lojbanic mathematical-expression_) is the part of the Lojban language that is tailored for expressing statements of a mathematical character, or for adding numerical information to non-mathematical statements. Its formal design goals include:

1. representing all the different forms of expression used by mathematicians in their normal modes of writing, so that a reader can unambiguously read off mathematical text as written with minimal effort and expect a listener to understand it;
2. providing a vocabulary of commonly used mathematical terms which can readily be expanded to include newly coined words using the full resources of Lojban;
3. permitting the formulation, both in writing and in speech, of unambiguous mathematical text;
4. encompassing all forms of quantified expression found in natural languages, as well as encouraging greater precision in ordinary language situations than natural languages allow.

Goal 1 requires that mekso not be constrained to a single notation such as Polish notation or reverse Polish notation, but make provision for all forms, with the most commonly used forms the most easily used.

Goal 2 requires the provision of several conversion mechanisms, so that the boundary between mekso and full Lojban can be crossed from either side at many points.

Goal 3 is the most subtle. Written mathematical expression is culturally unambiguous, in the sense that mathematicians in all parts of the world understand the same written texts to have the same meanings. However, international mathematical notation does not prescribe unique forms. For example, the expression

<span id="ex-18-1"></span><span id="example-random-id-dGcT"></span>
> _3x + 2y_

contains omitted multiplication operators, but there are other possible interpretations for the strings _3x_ and _2y_ than as mathematical multiplication. Therefore, the Lojban verbal (spoken and written) form of [Example 18.1](/en/books/cll/18/#ex-18-1) must not omit the multiplication operators.

The remainder of this chapter explains (in as much detail as is currently possible) the mekso system. This chapter is by intention complete as regards mekso components, but only suggestive about uses of those components – as of now, there has been no really comprehensive use made of mekso facilities, and many matters must await the test of usage to be fully clarified.

<span id="sec-18-2"></span><span id="section-mekso-numbers"></span>
### Lojban numbers

The following cmavo are discussed in this section:

<table>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>&lt;table&gt;<br/>&lt;tbody&gt;<br/>&lt;tr&gt;<br/>&lt;td&gt;<strong>pa</strong>&lt;/td&gt;<br/>&lt;td&gt;`PA`&lt;/td&gt;<br/>&lt;td&gt;1&lt;/td&gt;<br/>&lt;/tr&gt;<br/>&lt;tr&gt;<br/>&lt;td&gt;<strong>re</strong>&lt;/td&gt;<br/>&lt;td&gt;`PA`&lt;/td&gt;<br/>&lt;td&gt;2&lt;/td&gt;<br/>&lt;/tr&gt;<br/>&lt;tr&gt;<br/>&lt;td&gt;<strong>ci</strong>&lt;/td&gt;<br/>&lt;td&gt;`PA`&lt;/td&gt;<br/>&lt;td&gt;3&lt;/td&gt;<br/>&lt;/tr&gt;<br/>&lt;tr&gt;<br/>&lt;td&gt;<strong>vo</strong>&lt;/td&gt;<br/>&lt;td&gt;`PA`&lt;/td&gt;<br/>&lt;td&gt;4&lt;/td&gt;<br/>&lt;/tr&gt;<br/>&lt;tr&gt;<br/>&lt;td&gt;<strong>mu</strong>&lt;/td&gt;<br/>&lt;td&gt;`PA`&lt;/td&gt;<br/>&lt;td&gt;5&lt;/td&gt;<br/>&lt;/tr&gt;<br/>&lt;/tbody&gt;<br/>&lt;/table&gt;</td>
<td>&lt;table&gt;<br/>&lt;tbody&gt;<br/>&lt;tr&gt;<br/>&lt;td&gt;<strong>xa</strong>&lt;/td&gt;<br/>&lt;td&gt;`PA`&lt;/td&gt;<br/>&lt;td&gt;6&lt;/td&gt;<br/>&lt;/tr&gt;<br/>&lt;tr&gt;<br/>&lt;td&gt;<strong>ze</strong>&lt;/td&gt;<br/>&lt;td&gt;`PA`&lt;/td&gt;<br/>&lt;td&gt;7&lt;/td&gt;<br/>&lt;/tr&gt;<br/>&lt;tr&gt;<br/>&lt;td&gt;<strong>bi</strong>&lt;/td&gt;<br/>&lt;td&gt;`PA`&lt;/td&gt;<br/>&lt;td&gt;8&lt;/td&gt;<br/>&lt;/tr&gt;<br/>&lt;tr&gt;<br/>&lt;td&gt;<strong>so</strong>&lt;/td&gt;<br/>&lt;td&gt;`PA`&lt;/td&gt;<br/>&lt;td&gt;9&lt;/td&gt;<br/>&lt;/tr&gt;<br/>&lt;tr&gt;<br/>&lt;td&gt;<strong>no</strong>&lt;/td&gt;<br/>&lt;td&gt;`PA`&lt;/td&gt;<br/>&lt;td&gt;0&lt;/td&gt;<br/>&lt;/tr&gt;<br/>&lt;/tbody&gt;<br/>&lt;/table&gt;</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

The simplest kind of mekso are numbers, which are cmavo or compound cmavo. There are cmavo for each of the 10 decimal digits, and numbers greater than 9 are made by stringing together the cmavo. Some examples:

<span id="ex-18-2"></span><span id="example-random-id-LmPr"></span>
> **pa re ci**
> _one two three_
> _one hundred and twenty three_

<span id="ex-18-3"></span><span id="example-random-id-TNjj"></span>
> **pa no**
> _one zero_
> _ten_

<span id="ex-18-4"></span><span id="example-random-id-gjzw"></span>
> **pa re ci vo mu xa ze bi so no**
> _one two three four five six seven eight nine zero_
> _one billion, two hundred and thirty-four million, five hundred and sixty-seven thousand, eight hundred and ninety._

Therefore, there are no separate cmavo for _ten_, _hundred_, etc.

There is a pattern to the digit cmavo (except for **no**, 0) which is worth explaining. The cmavo from 1 to 5 end in the vowels **a**, **e**, **i**, **o**, **u** respectively; and the cmavo from 6 to 9 likewise end in the vowels **a**, **e**, **i**, and **o** respectively. None of the digit cmavo begin with the same consonant, to make them easy to tell apart in noisy environments.

<span id="sec-18-3"></span><span id="section-signs-punctuation"></span>
### Signs and numerical punctuation

The following cmavo are discussed in this section:

<table>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>**ma'u**</td>
<td>`PA`</td>
<td>positive sign</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>**ni'u**</td>
<td>`PA`</td>
<td>negative sign</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>**pi**</td>
<td>`PA`</td>
<td>decimal point</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>**fi'u**</td>
<td>`PA`</td>
<td>fraction slash</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>**ra'e**</td>
<td>`PA`</td>
<td>repeating decimal</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>**ce'i**</td>
<td>`PA`</td>
<td>percent sign</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>**ki'o**</td>
<td>`PA`</td>
<td>comma between digits</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

A number can be given an explicit sign by the use of **ma'u** and **ni'u**, which are the positive and negative signs as distinct from the addition, subtraction, and negation operators. For example:

<span id="ex-18-5"></span><span id="example-random-id-6A5H"></span>
> **ni'u pa**
> _negative-sign 1_

Grammatically, the signs are part of the number to which they are attached. It is also possible to use **ma'u** and **ni'u** by themselves as numbers; the meaning of these numbers is explained in [Sec. 18.8](/en/books/cll/18/#sec-18-8).

Various numerical punctuation marks are likewise expressed by cmavo, as illustrated in the following examples:

<span id="ex-18-6"></span><span id="example-random-id-Ust4"></span>
> **ci pi pa vo pa mu**
> _three point one four one five_

(In some cultures, a comma is used instead of a period in the symbolic version of [Example 18.6](/en/books/cll/18/#ex-18-6); **pi** is still the Lojban representation for the decimal point.)

<span id="ex-18-7"></span><span id="example-random-id-AeRL"></span>
> **re fi'u ze**
> _two fraction seven_

[Example 18.7](/en/books/cll/18/#ex-18-7) is the name of the number two-sevenths; it is not the same as _the result of 2 divided by 7_ in Lojban, although numerically these two are equal. If the denominator of the fraction is present but the numerator is not, the numerator is taken to be 1, thus expressing the reciprocal of the following number:

<span id="ex-18-8"></span><span id="example-random-id-qhvj"></span>
> **fi'u ze**
> _fraction seven_

<span id="ex-18-9"></span><span id="example-random-id-qhVs"></span>
> **pi ci mu ra'e pa vo re bi mu ze**
> _point three five repeating one four two eight five seven_

Note that the **ra'e** marks unambiguously where the repeating portion _142857_ begins.

<span id="ex-18-10"></span><span id="example-random-id-qhWd"></span>
> **ci mu ce'i**
> _three five percent_

<span id="ex-18-11"></span><span id="example-random-id-qhwM"></span>
> **pa ki'o re ci vo ki'o mu xa ze**
> _one comma two three four comma five six seven_

(In some cultures, spaces are used in the symbolic representation of [Example 18.11](/en/books/cll/18/#ex-18-11); **ki'o** is still the Lojban representation.)

It is also possible to have less than three digits between successive **ki'o** s, in which case zeros are assumed to have been elided:

<span id="ex-18-12"></span><span id="example-random-id-TTBx"></span>
> **pa ki'o re ci ki'o vo**
> _one comma two three comma four_

In the same way, **ki'o** can be used after **pi** to divide fractions into groups of three:

<span id="ex-18-13"></span><span id="example-random-id-qHwu"></span>
> **pi ki'o re re**
> _point comma two two_

<span id="ex-18-14"></span><span id="example-random-id-qhxp"></span>
> **pi pa ki'o pa re ki'o pa**
> _point one comma one two comma one_

<span id="sec-18-4"></span><span id="section-constants"></span>
### Special numbers

The following cmavo are discussed in this section:

<table>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>**ci'i**</td>
<td>`PA`</td>
<td>infinity</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>**ka'o**</td>
<td>`PA`</td>
<td>imaginary</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>**pai**</td>
<td>`PA`</td>
<td>π,</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>**te'o**</td>
<td>`PA`</td>
<td>exponential</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>**fi'u**</td>
<td>`PA`</td>
<td>golden ratio,</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

The last cmavo is the same as the fraction sign cmavo: a fraction sign with neither numerator nor denominator represents the golden ratio.

Numbers can have any of these digit, punctuation, and special-number cmavo of Sections 2, 3, and 4 in any combination:

<span id="ex-18-15"></span><span id="example-random-id-k2U4"></span>
> **ma'u ci'i**

<span id="ex-18-16"></span><span id="example-random-id-k2VC"></span>
> **ci ka'o re**
> _3i2 (a complex number equivalent to 3 + 2i)_

Note that **ka'o** is both a special number (meaning _i_) and a number punctuation mark (separating the real and the imaginary parts of a complex number).

<span id="ex-18-17"></span><span id="example-random-id-k32m"></span>
> **ci'i no**
> _infinity zero_

The special numbers **pai** and **te'o** are mathematically important, which is why they are given their own cmavo:

<span id="ex-18-18"></span><span id="example-random-id-k356"></span>
> **pai**
> _pi, π_

<span id="ex-18-19"></span><span id="example-random-id-k36i"></span>
> **te'o**
> _e_

However, many combinations are as yet undefined:

<span id="ex-18-20"></span><span id="example-random-id-qHXr"></span>
> **pa pi re pi ci**
> _1.2.3_

<span id="ex-18-21"></span><span id="example-random-id-qHya"></span>
> **pa ni'u re**
> _1 negative-sign 2_

[Example 18.21](/en/books/cll/18/#ex-18-21) is not _1 minus 2_, which is represented by a different cmavo sequence altogether. It is a single number which has not been assigned a meaning. There are many such numbers which have no well-defined meaning; they may be used for experimental purposes or for future expansion of the Lojban number system.

It is possible, of course, that some of these _oddities_ do have a meaningful use in some restricted area of mathematics. A mathematician appropriating these structures for specialized use needs to consider whether some other branch of mathematics would use the structure differently.

More information on numbers may be found in [Sec. 18.8](/en/books/cll/18/#sec-18-8) to [Sec. 18.12](/en/books/cll/18/#sec-18-12).

<span id="sec-18-5"></span><span id="section-simple-infix"></span>
### Simple infix expressions and equations

The following cmavo are discussed in this section:

<table>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>**du**</td>
<td>`GOhA`</td>
<td>equals</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>**su'i**</td>
<td>`VUhU`</td>
<td>plus</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>**vu'u**</td>
<td>`VUhU`</td>
<td>minus</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>**pi'i**</td>
<td>`VUhU`</td>
<td>times</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>**te'a**</td>
<td>`VUhU`</td>
<td>raised to the power</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>**ny.**</td>
<td>`BY`</td>
<td>letter</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>**vei**</td>
<td>`VEI`</td>
<td>left parenthesis</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>**ve'o**</td>
<td>`VEhO`</td>
<td>right parenthesis</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

Let us begin at the beginning: one plus one equals two. In Lojban, that sentence translates to:

<span id="ex-18-22"></span><span id="example-random-id-CUeK"></span>
> **li pa su'i pa du li re**
> _The-number one plus one equals the-number two._

[Example 18.22](/en/books/cll/18/#ex-18-22), a mekso sentence, is a regular Lojban bridi that exploits mekso features. **du** is the predicate meaning _x₁ is mathematically equal to x₂_. It is a cmavo for conciseness, but it has the same grammatical uses as any brivla. Outside mathematical contexts, **du** means _x₁ is identical with x₂_ or _x₁ is the same object as x₂_.

The cmavo **li** is the number article. It is required whenever a sentence talks about numbers as numbers, as opposed to using numbers to quantify things. For example:

<span id="ex-18-23"></span><span id="example-random-id-nSU9"></span>
> **le ci prenu**
> _the three persons_

requires no **li** article, because the **ci** is being used to specify the number of **prenu**. However, the sentence

<span id="ex-18-24"></span><span id="example-random-id-BNFi"></span>
> **levi sfani cu grake li ci**
> _This fly - masses-in-grams the-number three._
> _This fly has a mass of 3 grams._

requires **li** because **ci** is being used as a sumti. Note that this is the way in which measurements are stated in Lojban: all the predicates for units of length, mass, temperature, and so on have the measured object as the first place and a number as the second place. Using **li** for **le** in [Example 18.23](/en/books/cll/18/#ex-18-23) would produce

<span id="ex-18-25"></span><span id="example-random-id-gJe1"></span>
> **li ci prenu**
> _The-number 3 is-a-person._

which is grammatical but nonsensical: numbers are not persons.

The cmavo **su'i** belongs to selma'o VUhU, which is composed of mathematical operators, and means _addition_. As mentioned before, it is distinct from **ma'u** which means the positive sign as an indication of a positive number:

<span id="ex-18-26"></span><span id="example-random-id-4gsp"></span>
> **li ma'u pa su'i**
> _The-number positive-sign one plus_

Of course, it is legal to have complex mekso on both sides of **du**:

<span id="ex-18-27"></span><span id="example-random-id-d6bM"></span>
> **li mu su'i pa du li ci su'i ci**
> _The-number five plus one equals the-number three plus three._

Why don't we say **li mu su'i li pa** rather than just **li mu su'i pa**? The answer is that VUhU operators connect mekso operands (numbers, in [Example 18.27](/en/books/cll/18/#ex-18-27)), not general sumti. **li** is used to make the entire mekso into a sumti, which then plays the roles applicable to other sumti: in [Example 18.27](/en/books/cll/18/#ex-18-27), filling the places of a bridi

By default, Lojban mathematics is like simple calculator mathematics: there is no notion of _operator precedence_. Consider the following example, where **pi'i** means _times_, the multiplication operator:

<span id="ex-18-28"></span><span id="example-random-id-7a2Q"></span>
> **li ci su'i vo pi'i mu du li reci**
> _The-number three plus four times five equals the-number two-three._

Is the Lojban version of [Example 18.28](/en/books/cll/18/#ex-18-28) true? No! _3 + 4 × 5_ is indeed 23, because the usual conventions of mathematics state that multiplication takes precedence over addition; that is, the multiplication _4 × 5_ is done first, giving 20, and only then the addition _3 + 20_. But VUhU operators by default are done left to right, like other Lojban grouping, and so a truthful bridi would be:

<span id="ex-18-29"></span><span id="example-random-id-XUQh"></span>
> **li ci su'i vo pi'i mu du li cimu**
> _The-number three plus four times five equals the-number three-five._

Here we calculate 3 + 4 first, giving 7, and then calculate 7 × 5 second, leading to the result 35. While possessing the advantage of simplicity, this result violates the design goal of matching the standards of mathematics. What can be done?

There are three solutions, all of which will probably be used to some degree. The first solution is to ignore the problem. People will say **li ci su'i vo pi'i mu** and mean 23 by it, because the notion that multiplication takes precedence over addition is too deeply ingrained to be eradicated by Lojban parsing, which totally ignores semantics. This convention essentially allows semantics to dominate syntax in this one area.

(Why not hard-wire the precedences into the grammar, as is done in computer programming languages? Essentially because there are too many operators, known and unknown, with levels of precedence that vary according to usage. The programming language 'C' has 13 levels of precedence, and its list of operators is not even extensible. For Lojban this approach is just not practical. In addition, hard-wired precedence could not be overridden in mathematical systems such as spreadsheets where the conventions are different.)

The second solution is to use explicit means to specify the precedence of operators. This approach is fully general, but clumsy, and will be explained in [Sec. 18.20](/en/books/cll/18/#sec-18-20).

The third solution is simple but not very general. When an operator is prefixed with the cmavo **bi'e** (of selma'o BIhE), it becomes automatically of higher precedence than other operators not so prefixed. Thus,

<span id="ex-18-30"></span><span id="example-random-id-LIUa"></span>
> **li ci su'i vo bi'e pi'i mu du li reci**
> _The-number three plus four - times five equals the-number two-three._

is a truthful Lojban bridi. If more than one operator has a **bi'e** prefix, grouping is from the right; multiple **bi'e** prefixes on a single operator are not allowed.

In addition, of course, Lojban has the mathematical parentheses **vei** and **ve'o**, which can be used just like their written equivalents _(_ and _)_ to group expressions in any way desired:

<span id="ex-18-31"></span><span id="example-random-id-wfFV"></span>
> **li vei ny. su'i pa ve'o pi'i vei ny. su'i pa [ve'o]**
> _The-number ( n plus one ) times ( n plus one )_

There are several new usages in [Example 18.31](/en/books/cll/18/#ex-18-31): **te'a** means _raised to the power_, and we also see the use of the lerfu word **ny**, representing the letter _n_. In mekso, letters stand for just what they do in ordinary mathematics: variables. The parser will accept a string of lerfu words (called a _lerfu string_) as the equivalent of a single lerfu word, in agreement with computer-science conventions; _abc_ is a single variable, not the equivalent of _a × b × c_. (Of course, a local convention could state that the value of a variable like _abc_, with a multi-lerfu name, was equal to the values of the variables _a_, _b_, and _c_ multiplied together.)

The explicit operator **pi'i** is required in the Lojban verbal form whereas multiplication is implicit in the symbolic form. Note that **ve'o** (the right parenthesis) is an elidable terminator: the first use of it in [Example 18.31](/en/books/cll/18/#ex-18-31) is required, but the second use (marked by square brackets) could be elided. Additionally, the first **bi'e** (also marked by square brackets) is not necessary to get the proper grouping, but it is included here for symmetry with the other one.

<span id="sec-18-6"></span><span id="section-forethought"></span>
### Forethought operators (Polish notation, functions)

The following cmavo are discussed in this section:

<table>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>**boi**</td>
<td>`BOI`</td>
<td>numeral/lerfu string terminator</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>**va'a**</td>
<td>`VUhU`</td>
<td>negation/additive inverse</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>**pe'o**</td>
<td>`PEhO`</td>
<td>forethought flag</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>**ku'e**</td>
<td>`KUhE`</td>
<td>forethought terminator</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>**ma'o**</td>
<td>`MAhO`</td>
<td>convert operand to operator</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>**py.**</td>
<td>`BY`</td>
<td>letter</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>**xy.**</td>
<td>`BY`</td>
<td>letter</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>**zy.**</td>
<td>`BY`</td>
<td>letter</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>**fy.**</td>
<td>`BY`</td>
<td>letter</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

The infix form explained so far is reasonable for many purposes, but it is limited and rigid. It works smoothly only where all operators have exactly two operands, and where precedences can either be assumed from context or are limited to just two levels, with some help from parentheses.

But there are many operators which do not have two operands, or which have a variable number of operands. The preferred form of expression in such cases is the use of _forethought operators_, also known as Polish notation. In this style of writing mathematics, the operator comes first and the operands afterwards:

<span id="ex-18-32"></span><span id="example-random-id-I0Bm"></span>
> **li su'i paboi reboi ci[boi] du li xa**
> _The-number the-sum-of one two three equals the-number six._

Note that the normally elidable number terminator **boi** is required after **pa** and **re** because otherwise the reading would be **pareci**= 123. It is not required after **ci** but is inserted here in brackets for the sake of symmetry. The only time **boi** is required is, as in [Example 18.32](/en/books/cll/18/#ex-18-32), when there are two consecutive numbers or lerfu strings.

Forethought mekso can use any number of operands, in [Example 18.32](/en/books/cll/18/#ex-18-32), three. How do we know how many operands there are in ambiguous circumstances? The usual Lojban solution is employed: an elidable terminator, namely **ku'e**. Here is an example:

<span id="ex-18-33"></span><span id="example-random-id-IxMG"></span>
> **li py. su'i va'a ny. ku'e su'i zy du**
> _The-number _p_ plus negative-of(_n_) plus _z_ equals_

where we know that **va'a** is a forethought operator because there is no operand preceding it.

**va'a** is the numerical negation operator, of selma'o VUhU. In contrast, **vu'u** is not used for numerical negation, but only for subtraction, as it always has two or more operands. Do not confuse **va'a** and **vu'u**, which are operators, with **ni'u**, which is part of a number.

In [Example 18.33](/en/books/cll/18/#ex-18-33), the operator **va'a** and the terminator **ku'e** serve in effect as parentheses. (The regular parentheses **vei** and **ve'o** are NOT used for this purpose.) If the **ku'e** were omitted, the **su'i zy** would be swallowed up by the **va'a** forethought operator, which would then appear to have two operands, **ny** and **su'i zy.**, where the latter is also a forethought expression.

Forethought mekso is also useful for matching standard functional notation. How do we represent _z = f(x)_? The answer is:

<span id="ex-18-34"></span><span id="example-random-id-VybU"></span>
> **li zy du li ma'o fy.boi xy.**
> _The-number z equals the-number the-operator f x._

Again, no parentheses are used. The construct **ma'o fy.boi** is the equivalent of an operator, and appears in forethought here (although it could also be used as a regular infix operator). In mathematics, letters sometimes mean functions and sometimes mean variables, with only the context to tell which. Lojban chooses to accept the variable interpretation as the default, and uses the special flag **ma'o** to mark a lerfu string as an operator. The cmavo **xy.** and **zy.** are variables, but **fy.** is an operator (a function) because **ma'o** marks it as such. The **boi** is required because otherwise the **xy.** would look like part of the operator name. (The use of **ma'o** can be generalized from lerfu strings to any mekso operand: see [Sec. 18.21](/en/books/cll/18/#sec-18-21).)

When using forethought mekso, the optional marker **pe'o** may be placed in front of the operator. This usage can help avoid confusion by providing clearly marked **pe'o** and **ku'e** pairs to delimit the operand list. [Example 18.32](/en/books/cll/18/#ex-18-32) to [Example 18.34](/en/books/cll/18/#ex-18-34), respectively, with explicit **pe'o** and **ku'e**:

<span id="ex-18-35"></span><span id="example-random-id-qhz5"></span>
<span id="ex-18-36"></span><span id="example-random-id-qhzu"></span>
<span id="ex-18-37"></span><span id="example-random-id-qi0g"></span>
Note: When using forethought mekso, be sure that the operands really are operands: they cannot contain regular infix expressions unless parenthesized with **vei** and **ve'o**. An earlier version of the complex [Example 18.119](/en/books/cll/18/#ex-18-119) came to grief because I forgot this rule.

<span id="sec-18-7"></span><span id="section-useful-selbri"></span>
### Other useful selbri for mekso bridi

So far our examples have been isolated mekso (it is legal to have a bare mekso as a sentence in Lojban) and equation bridi involving **du**. What about inequalities such as _x < 5_? The answer is to use a bridi with an appropriate selbri, thus:

<span id="ex-18-38"></span><span id="example-random-id-s4TW"></span>
> **li xy. mleca li mu**
> _The-number x is-less-than the-number 5._

Here is a partial list of selbri useful in mathematical bridi:

<table>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>du</td>
<td>x₁ is identical to x₂, x₃, x₄, ...</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>dunli</td>
<td>x₁ is equal/congruent to x₂ in/on property/quality/dimension/quantity x₃</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>mleca</td>
<td>x₁ is less than x₂</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>zmadu</td>
<td>x₁ is greater than x₂</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>dubjavme&#x27;a</td>
<td>x₁ is less than or equal to x₂ [du ja mleca, equal or less]</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>dubjavmau</td>
<td>x₁ is greater than or equal to x₂ [du ja zmadu, equal or greater]</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>tamdu&#x27;i</td>
<td>x₁ is similar to x₂ [tarmi dunli, shape-equal]</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>turdu&#x27;i</td>
<td>x₁ is isomorphic to x₂ [stura dunli, structure-equal]</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>cmima</td>
<td>x₁ is a member of set x₂</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>gripau</td>
<td>x₁ is a subset of set x₂ [girzu pagbu, set-part]</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>na&#x27;ujbi</td>
<td>x₁ is approximately equal to x₂ [namcu jibni, number-near]</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>terci&#x27;e</td>
<td>x₁ is a component with function x₂ of system x₃</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

Note the difference between **dunli** and **du**; **dunli** has a third place that specifies the kind of equality that is meant. **du** refers to actual identity, and can have any number of places:

<span id="ex-18-39"></span><span id="example-random-id-PTmF"></span>
> **py. du xy.boi zy.**
> __p_ is-identical-to _x_ _z__

Lojban bridi can have only one predicate, so the **du** is not repeated.

Any of these selbri may usefully be prefixed with **na**, the contradictory negation cmavo, to indicate that the relation is false:

<span id="ex-18-40"></span><span id="example-random-id-WuRn"></span>
> **li re su'i re na du li mu**
> _the-number 2 + 2 is-not equal-to the-number 5._

As usual in Lojban, negated bridi say what is false, and do not say anything about what might be true.

<span id="sec-18-8"></span><span id="section-indefinite-numbers"></span>
### Indefinite numbers

The following cmavo are discussed in this section:

<table>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>**ro**</td>
<td>`PA`</td>
<td>all</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>**so'a**</td>
<td>`PA`</td>
<td>almost all</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>**so'e**</td>
<td>`PA`</td>
<td>most</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>**so'i**</td>
<td>`PA`</td>
<td>many</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>**so'o**</td>
<td>`PA`</td>
<td>several</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>**so'u**</td>
<td>`PA`</td>
<td>a few</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>**no'o**</td>
<td>`PA`</td>
<td>the typical number of</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>**da'a**</td>
<td>`PA`</td>
<td>all but (one) of</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>**piro**</td>
<td>`PA+PA`</td>
<td>the whole of/all of</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>**piso'a**</td>
<td>`PA+PA`</td>
<td>almost the whole of</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>**piso'e**</td>
<td>`PA+PA`</td>
<td>most of</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>**piso'i**</td>
<td>`PA+PA`</td>
<td>much of</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>**piso'o**</td>
<td>`PA+PA`</td>
<td>a small part of</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>**piso'u**</td>
<td>`PA+PA`</td>
<td>a tiny part of</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>**pino'o**</td>
<td>`PA+PA`</td>
<td>the typical portion of</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>**rau**</td>
<td>`PA`</td>
<td>enough</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>**du'e**</td>
<td>`PA`</td>
<td>too many</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>**mo'a**</td>
<td>`PA`</td>
<td>too few</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>**pirau**</td>
<td>`PA+PA`</td>
<td>enough of</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>**pidu'e**</td>
<td>`PA+PA`</td>
<td>too much of</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>**pimo'a**</td>
<td>`PA+PA`</td>
<td>too little of</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

Not all the cmavo of PA represent numbers in the usual mathematical sense. For example, the cmavo **ro** means _all_ or _each_. This number does not have a definite value in the abstract: **li ro** is undefined. But when used to count or quantify something, the parallel between **ro** and **pa** is clearer:

<span id="ex-18-41"></span><span id="example-random-id-qI27"></span>
> **mi catlu pa prenu**
> _I look-at one person_

<span id="ex-18-42"></span><span id="example-random-id-qI3P"></span>
> **mi catlu ro prenu**
> _I look-at all persons_

[Example 18.41](/en/books/cll/18/#ex-18-41) might be true, whereas [Example 18.42](/en/books/cll/18/#ex-18-42) is almost certainly false.

The cmavo **so'a**, **so'e**, **so'i**, **so'o**, and **so'u** represent a set of indefinite numbers less than **ro**. As you go down an alphabetical list, the magnitude decreases:

<span id="ex-18-43"></span><span id="example-random-id-qi4a"></span>
> **mi catlu so'a prenu**
> _I look-at almost-all persons_

<span id="ex-18-44"></span><span id="example-random-id-qi55"></span>
> **mi catlu so'e prenu**
> _I look-at most persons_

<span id="ex-18-45"></span><span id="example-random-id-qi5m"></span>
> **mi catlu so'i prenu**
> _I look-at many persons_

<span id="ex-18-46"></span><span id="example-random-id-qi5U"></span>
> **mi catlu so'o prenu**
> _I look-at several persons_

<span id="ex-18-47"></span><span id="example-random-id-qI6B"></span>
> **mi catlu so'u prenu**
> _I look-at a-few persons_

The English equivalents are only rough: the cmavo provide space for up to five indefinite numbers between **ro** and **no**, with a built-in ordering. In particular, **so'e** does not mean _most_ in the sense of _a majority_ or _more than half_.

Each of these numbers, plus **ro**, may be prefixed with **pi** (the decimal point) in order to make a fractional form which represents part of a whole rather than some elements of a totality. **piro** therefore means _the whole of_:

<span id="ex-18-48"></span><span id="example-random-id-dwJI"></span>
> **mi citka piro lei nanba**
> _I eat the-whole-of the-mass-of bread_

Similarly, **piso'a** means _almost the whole of_; and so on down to **piso'u**, _a tiny part of_. These numbers are particularly appropriate with masses, which are usually measured rather than counted, as [Example 18.48](/en/books/cll/18/#ex-18-48) shows.

In addition to these cmavo, there is **no'o**, meaning _the typical value_, and **pino'o**, meaning _the typical portion_: Sometimes **no'o** can be translated _the average value_, but the average in question is not, in general, a mathematical mean, median, or mode; these would be more appropriately represented by operators.

<span id="ex-18-49"></span><span id="example-random-id-qi7Q"></span>
> **mi catlu no'o prenu**
> _I look-at a-typical-number-of persons_

<span id="ex-18-50"></span><span id="example-random-id-qI8K"></span>
> **mi citka pino'o lei nanba**
> _I eat a-typical-amount-of the-mass-of bread._

**da'a** is a related cmavo meaning _all but_:

<span id="ex-18-51"></span><span id="example-random-id-qi94"></span>
> **mi catlu da'a re prenu**
> _I look-at all-but two persons_

<span id="ex-18-52"></span><span id="example-random-id-qia0"></span>
> **mi catlu da'a so'u prenu**
> _I look-at all-but a-few persons_

[Example 18.52](/en/books/cll/18/#ex-18-52) is similar in meaning to [Example 18.43](/en/books/cll/18/#ex-18-43).

If no number follows **da'a**, then **pa** is assumed; **da'a** by itself means _all but one_, or in ordinal contexts _all but the last_:

<span id="ex-18-53"></span><span id="example-random-id-3z2U"></span>
> **ro ratcu ka'e citka da'a ratcu**
> _All rats can eat all-but-one rats._
> _All rats can eat all other rats._

(The use of **da'a** means that [Example 18.53](/en/books/cll/18/#ex-18-53) does not require that all rats can eat themselves, but does allow it. Each rat has one rat it cannot eat, but that one might be some rat other than itself. Context often dictates that _itself_ is, indeed, the _other_ rat.)

As mentioned in [Sec. 18.3](/en/books/cll/18/#sec-18-3), **ma'u** and **ni'u** are also legal numbers, and they mean _some positive number_ and _some negative number_ respectively.

<span id="ex-18-54"></span><span id="example-random-id-qiaK"></span>
> **li ci vu'u re du li ma'u**
> _the-number 3 − 2 = - some-positive-number_

<span id="ex-18-55"></span><span id="example-random-id-qiAq"></span>
> **li ci vu'u vo du li ni'u**
> _the-number 3 − 4 = - some-negative-number_

<span id="ex-18-56"></span><span id="example-random-id-qiAR"></span>
> **mi ponse ma'u rupnu**
> _I possess a-positive-number-of currency-units._

All of the numbers discussed so far are objective, even if indefinite. If there are exactly six superpowers (**rairgugde**, _superlative-states_) in the world, then **ro rairgugde** means the same as **xa rairgugde**. It is often useful, however, to express subjective indefinite values. The cmavo **rau** (enough), **du'e** (too many), and **mo'a** (too few) are then appropriate:

<span id="ex-18-57"></span><span id="example-random-id-TIiE"></span>
> **mi ponse rau rupnu**
> _I possess enough currency-units._

Like the **so'a**-series, **rau**, **du'e**, and **mo'a** can be preceded by **pi**; for example, **pirau** means _a sufficient part of._

Another possibility is that of combining definite and indefinite numbers into a single number. This usage implies that the two kinds of numbers have the same value in the given context:

<span id="ex-18-58"></span><span id="example-random-id-qibb"></span>
> **mi viska le rore gerku**
> _I saw the all-of/two dogs._
> _I saw both dogs._

<span id="ex-18-59"></span><span id="example-random-id-qIBi"></span>
> **mi speni so'ici prenu**
> _I am-married-to many/three persons._
> _I am married to three persons (which is _many_ in the circumstances)._

[Example 18.59](/en/books/cll/18/#ex-18-59) assumes a mostly monogamous culture by stating that three is _many_.

<span id="sec-18-9"></span><span id="section-approximation"></span>
### Approximation and inexact numbers

The following cmavo are discussed in this section:

<table>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>**ji'i**</td>
<td>`PA`</td>
<td>approximately</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>**su'e**</td>
<td>`PA`</td>
<td>at most</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>**su'o**</td>
<td>`PA`</td>
<td>at least</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>**me'i**</td>
<td>`PA`</td>
<td>less than</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>**za'u**</td>
<td>`PA`</td>
<td>more than</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

The cmavo **ji'i** (of selma'o PA) is used in several ways to indicate approximate or rounded numbers. If it appears at the beginning of a number, the whole number is approximate:

<span id="ex-18-60"></span><span id="example-random-id-YLcy"></span>
> **ji'i vo no**
> _approximation four zero_
> _approximately 40_

If **ji'i** appears in the middle of a number, all the digits following it are approximate:

<span id="ex-18-61"></span><span id="example-random-id-BANC"></span>
> **vo no ji'i mu no**
> _four zero approximation five zero_
> _roughly 4050 (where the _four thousand_ is exact, but the _fifty_ is approximate)_

If **ji'i** appears at the end of a number, it indicates that the number has been rounded. In addition, it can then be followed by a sign cmavo (**ma'u** or **ni'u**), which indicate truncation towards positive or negative infinity respectively.

<span id="ex-18-62"></span><span id="example-random-id-qIc5"></span>
> **re pi ze re ji'i**
> _two point seven two approximation_
> _2.72 (rounded)_

<span id="ex-18-63"></span><span id="example-random-id-qicz"></span>
> **re pi ze re ji'i ma'u**
> _two point seven two approximation positive-sign_
> _2.72 (rounded up)_

<span id="ex-18-64"></span><span id="example-random-id-qiDE"></span>
> **re pi ze pa ji'i ni'u**
> _two point seven one approximation negative-sign_
> _2.71 (rounded down)_

[Example 18.62](/en/books/cll/18/#ex-18-62) through [Example 18.64](/en/books/cll/18/#ex-18-64) are all approximations to **te'o** (exponential e). **ji'i** can also appear by itself, in which case it means _approximately the typical value in this context_.

The four cmavo **su'e**, **su'o**, **me'i**, and **za'u**, also of selma'o PA, express inexact numbers with upper or lower bounds:

<span id="ex-18-65"></span><span id="example-random-id-qidi"></span>
> **mi catlu su'e re prenu**
> _I look-at at-most two persons_

<span id="ex-18-66"></span><span id="example-random-id-qiE3"></span>
> **mi catlu su'o re prenu**
> _I look-at at-least two persons_

<span id="ex-18-67"></span><span id="example-random-id-qIe7"></span>
> **mi catlu me'i re prenu**
> _I look-at less-than two persons_

<span id="ex-18-68"></span><span id="example-random-id-qIfM"></span>
> **mi catlu za'u re prenu**
> _I look-at more-than two persons_

Each of these is a subtly different claim: [Example 18.66](/en/books/cll/18/#ex-18-66) is true of two or any greater number, whereas [Example 18.68](/en/books/cll/18/#ex-18-68) requires three persons or more. Likewise, [Example 18.65](/en/books/cll/18/#ex-18-65) refers to zero, one, or two; [Example 18.67](/en/books/cll/18/#ex-18-67) to zero or one. (Of course, when the context allows numbers other than non-negative integers, **me'i re** can be any number less than 2, and likewise with the other cases.) The exact quantifier, _exactly 2, neither more nor less_ is just **re**. Note that **su'ore** is the exact Lojban equivalent of English plurals.

If no number follows one of these cmavo, **pa** is understood: therefore,

<span id="ex-18-69"></span><span id="example-random-id-brir"></span>
> **mi catlu su'o prenu**
> _I look-at at-least-[one] person_

is a meaningful claim.

Like the numbers in [Sec. 18.8](/en/books/cll/18/#sec-18-8), all of these cmavo may be preceded by **pi** to make the corresponding quantifiers for part of a whole. For example, **pisu'o** means _at least some part of_. The quantifiers **ro**, **su'o**, **piro**, and **pisu'o** are particularly important in Lojban, as they are implicitly used in the descriptions introduced by the cmavo of selma'o LA and LE, as explained in [Sec. 6.7](/en/books/cll/6/#sec-6-7). Descriptions in general are outside the scope of this chapter.

<span id="sec-18-10"></span><span id="section-radixen"></span>
### Non-decimal and compound bases

The following cmavo are discussed in this section:

<table>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>**ju'u**</td>
<td>`VUhU`</td>
<td>to the base</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>**dau**</td>
<td>`PA`</td>
<td>hex digit A = 10</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>**fei**</td>
<td>`PA`</td>
<td>hex digit B = 11</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>**gai**</td>
<td>`PA`</td>
<td>hex digit C = 12</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>**jau**</td>
<td>`PA`</td>
<td>hex digit D = 13</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>**rei**</td>
<td>`PA`</td>
<td>hex digit E = 14</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>**vai**</td>
<td>`PA`</td>
<td>hex digit F = 15</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>**pi'e**</td>
<td>`PA`</td>
<td>compound base point</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

In normal contexts, Lojban assumes that all numbers are expressed in the decimal (base 10) system. However, other bases are possible, and may be appropriate in particular circumstances.

To specify a number in a particular base, the VUhU operator **ju'u** is suitable:

<span id="ex-18-70"></span><span id="example-random-id-Iw8u"></span>
> **li panopano ju'u re du li pano**
> _The-number 1010 base 2 equals the-number 1 0._

Here, the final **pa no** is assumed to be base 10, as usual; so is the base specification. (The base may also be changed permanently by a metalinguistic specification; no standard way of doing so has as yet been worked out.)

Lojban has digits for representing bases up to 16, because 16 is a base often used in computer applications. In English, it is customary to use the letters A-F as the base 16 digits equivalent to the numbers ten through fifteen. In Lojban, this ambiguity is avoided:

<span id="ex-18-71"></span><span id="example-random-id-qIgb"></span>
> **li daufeigai ju'u paxa du li rezevobi**
> _The-number ABC base 16 equals the-number 2748._

<span id="ex-18-72"></span><span id="example-random-id-qIha"></span>
> **li jaureivai ju'u paxa du li cimuxaze**
> _The-number DEF base 16 equals the-number 3567._

Note the pattern in the cmavo: the diphthongs **au**, **ei**, **ai** are used twice in the same order. The digits for A to D use consonants different from those used in the decimal digit cmavo; E and F unfortunately overlap 2 and 4 – there was simply not enough available cmavo space to make a full differentiation possible. The cmavo are also in alphabetical order.

The base point **pi** is used in non-decimal bases just as in base 10:

<span id="ex-18-73"></span><span id="example-random-id-gCo4"></span>
> **li vai pi bi ju'u paxa du li pamu pi mu**
> _The-number F . 8 base 16 equals the-number 15 . 5._

Since **ju'u** is an operator of selma'o VUhU, it is grammatical to use any operand as the left argument. Semantically, however, it is undefined to use anything but a numeral string on the left. The reason for making **ju'u** an operator is to allow reference to a base which is not a constant.

There are some numerical values that require a _base_ that varies from digit to digit. For example, times represented in hours, minutes, and seconds have, in effect, three _digits_: the first is base 24, the second and third are base 60. To express such numbers, the compound base separator **pi'e** is used:

<span id="ex-18-74"></span><span id="example-random-id-17HR"></span>
> **ci pi'e rere pi'e vono**

Each digit sequence separated by instances of **pi'e** is expressed in decimal notation, but the number as a whole is not decimal and can only be added and subtracted by special rules:

<span id="ex-18-75"></span><span id="example-random-id-iUYu"></span>
> **li ci pi'e rere pi'e vono su'i pi'e ci pi'e cici**
> _The-number 3 : 22 : 40 plus : 3 : 33_

Of course, only context tells you that the first part of the numbers in [Example 18.74](/en/books/cll/18/#ex-18-74) and [Example 18.75](/en/books/cll/18/#ex-18-75) is hours, the second minutes, and the third seconds.

The same mechanism using **pi'e** can be used to express numbers which have a base larger than 16. For example, base-20 Mayan mathematics might use digits from **no** to **paso**, each separated by **pi'e**:

<span id="ex-18-76"></span><span id="example-random-id-Nx5T"></span>
> **li pa pi'e re pi'e ci ju'u reno du li vovoci**
> _the-number 1 ; 2 ; 3 base 20 equals the-number 443_

Carefully note the difference between:

<span id="ex-18-77"></span><span id="example-random-id-ydwP"></span>
> **pano ju'u reno**
> _the-digit-10 base 20_

which is equal to ten, and:

<span id="ex-18-78"></span><span id="example-random-id-QBQx"></span>
> **pa pi'e no ju'u reno**
> _1;0 base 20_

which is equal to twenty.

Both **pi** and **pi'e** can be used to express large-base fractions:

<span id="ex-18-79"></span><span id="example-random-id-26Li"></span>
> **li pa pi'e vo pi ze ju'u reno**
> _The-number 1 ; 4 . 7 base 20_

**pi'e** is also used where the base of each digit is vague, as in the numbering of the examples in this chapter:

<span id="ex-18-80"></span><span id="example-random-id-U161"></span>
> **dei jufra panopi'epapamoi**
> _This-utterance is-a-sentence-type-of 10;11th-thing._
> _This is Sentence 10.11._

<span id="sec-18-11"></span><span id="section-mekso-selbri"></span>
### Special mekso selbri

The following cmavo are discussed in this section:

<table>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>**mei**</td>
<td>`MOI`</td>
<td>cardinal selbri</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>**moi**</td>
<td>`MOI`</td>
<td>ordinal selbri</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>**si'e**</td>
<td>`MOI`</td>
<td>portion selbri</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>**cu'o**</td>
<td>`MOI`</td>
<td>probability selbri</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>**va'e**</td>
<td>`MOI`</td>
<td>scale selbri</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>**me**</td>
<td>`ME`</td>
<td>make sumti into selbri</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>**me'u**</td>
<td>`MEhU`</td>
<td>terminator for ME</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

Lojban possesses a special category of selbri which are based on mekso. The simplest kind of such selbri are made by suffixing a member of selma'o MOI to a number. There are five members of MOI, each of which serves to create number-based selbri with specific place structures.

The cmavo **mei** creates cardinal selbri. The basic place structure is:

A cardinal selbri interrelates a set with a given number of members, the mass formed from that set, and the individuals which make the set up. The mass argument is placed first as a matter of convenience, not logical necessity.

Some examples:

<span id="ex-18-81"></span><span id="example-random-id-ujSA"></span>
> **lei mi ratcu cu cimei**
> _Those-I-describe-as-the-mass-of my rats - are-a-threesome._
> _My rats are three._

Here, the mass of my rats is said to have three components; that is, I have three rats.

Another example, with one element this time:

<span id="ex-18-82"></span><span id="example-random-id-1Pen"></span>
> **mi poi pamei cu cusku dei**
> _I who am-an-individual - express this-sentence._

In [Example 18.82](/en/books/cll/18/#ex-18-82), **mi** refers to a mass, _the mass consisting of me_. Personal pronouns are vague between masses, sets, and individuals.

However, when the number expressed before -mei is an objective indefinite number of the kind explained in [Sec. 18.8](/en/books/cll/18/#sec-18-8), a slightly different place structure is required:

An example:

<span id="ex-18-83"></span><span id="example-random-id-GJsg"></span>
> **lei ratcu poi zvati le panka**
> _The-mass-of rats which are-in the park_

In [Example 18.83](/en/books/cll/18/#ex-18-83), the x₂ and x₃ places are vacant, and the x₄ place is filled by **lo'i ratcu**, which (because no quantifiers are explicitly given) means _the whole of the set of all those things which are rats_, or simply _the set of all rats._

<span id="ex-18-84"></span><span id="example-random-id-n52D"></span>
> **le'i ratcu poi zvati le panka cu se so'imei**
> _The-set-of rats which-are in the park - is-a manysome._
> _There are many rats in the park._

In [Example 18.84](/en/books/cll/18/#ex-18-84), the conversion cmavo **se** swaps the x₁ and the x₂ places, so that the new x₁ is the set. The x₄ set is unspecified, so the implication is that the rats are _many_ with respect to some unspecified comparison set.

More explanations about the interrelationship of sets, masses, and individuals can be found in [Sec. 6.3](/en/books/cll/6/#sec-6-3).

The cmavo **moi** creates ordinal selbri. The place structure is:

Some examples:

<span id="ex-18-85"></span><span id="example-random-id-qiHw"></span>
> **ti pamoi le'i mi ratcu**
> _This-one is-the-first-of the associated-with-me rats._
> _This is my first rat._

<span id="ex-18-86"></span><span id="example-random-id-qii2"></span>
> **ta romoi le'i mi ratcu**
> _That is-the-allth-of the associated-with-me rats._
> _That is my last rat._

<span id="ex-18-87"></span><span id="example-random-id-qIiA"></span>
> **mi raumoi le velskina porsi**
> _I am-enough-th-in the movie-audience sequence_
> _I am enough-th in the movie line._

[Example 18.87](/en/books/cll/18/#ex-18-87) means, in the appropriate context, that my position in line is sufficiently far to the front that I will get a seat for the movie.

The cmavo **si'e** creates portion selbri. The place structure is:

Some examples:

<span id="ex-18-88"></span><span id="example-random-id-i8r4"></span>
> **levi sanmi cu fi'ucisi'e lei mi djedi cidja**
> _This-here meal - is-a-slash-three-portion-of - my day food._
> _This meal is one-third of my daily food._

The cmavo **cu'o** creates probability selbri. The place structure is:

The number must be between 0 and 1 inclusive. For example:

<span id="ex-18-89"></span><span id="example-random-id-9sf6"></span>
> **le nu lo sicni cu sedja'o cu pimucu'o**
> _The event of-a coin - being-a-head-displayer - has-probability-.5._

The cmavo **va'e** creates a scale selbri. The place structure is:

If the scale is granular rather than continuous, a form like **cifi'uxa** (3/6) may be used; in this case, 3/6 is not the same as 1/2, because the third position on a scale of six positions is not the same as the first position on a scale of two positions. Here is an example:

<span id="ex-18-90"></span><span id="example-random-id-XiTd"></span>
> **levi rozgu cu sofi'upanova'e xunre**
> _This-here rose - is-8/10-scale red._
> _This rose is 8 out of 10 on the scale of redness._

When the quantifier preceding any MOI cmavo includes the subjective numbers **rau**, **du'e**, or **mo'a** (enough, too many, too few) then an additional place is added for _by standard_. For example:

<span id="ex-18-91"></span><span id="example-random-id-aGLh"></span>
> **lei ratcu poi zvati le**
> _The-mass-of rats which-are in the_

The extra place (which for **-mei** is the x₄ place labeled by **fo**) is provided rather than using a BAI tag such as **ma'i** because a specification of the standard for judgment is essential to the meaning of subjective words like _enough_.

This place is not normally explicit when using one of the subjective numbers directly as a number. Therefore, **du'e ratcu** means _too many rats_ without specifying any standard.

It is also grammatical to substitute a lerfu string for a number:

<span id="ex-18-92"></span><span id="example-random-id-cyLo"></span>
> **ta ny.moi le'i mi ratcu**
> _That is-nth-of the-set-of associated-with-me rats._
> _That is my nth rat._

More complex mekso cannot be placed directly in front of MOI, due to the resulting grammatical ambiguities. Instead, a somewhat artificial form of expression is required.

The cmavo **me** (of selma'o ME) has the function of making a sumti into a selbri. A whole **me** construction can have a member of MOI added to the end to create a complex mekso selbri:

<span id="ex-18-93"></span><span id="example-random-id-xaYd"></span>
> **ta me li ny. su'i pa me'u moi**
> _That is the-number n plus one - -th-of_

Here the mekso **ny. su'i pa** is made into a sumti (with **li**) and then changed into a mekso selbri with **me** and **me'u moi**. The elidable terminator **me'u** is required here in order to keep the **pa** and the **moi** separate; otherwise, the parser will combine them into the compound **pamoi** and reject the sentence as ungrammatical.

It is perfectly possible to use non-numerical sumti after **me** and before a member of MOI, producing strange results indeed:

<span id="ex-18-94"></span><span id="example-random-id-enCe"></span>
> **le nu mi nolraitru cu me**
> _The event-of me being-a-nobly-superlative-ruler - -_

Note: the elidable terminator **boi** is not used between a number and a member of MOI. As a result, the **me'u** in [Example 18.93](/en/books/cll/18/#ex-18-93) could also be replaced by a **boi**, which would serve the same function of preventing the **pa** and **moi** from joining into a compound.

<span id="sec-18-12"></span><span id="section-number-questions"></span>
### Number questions

The following cmavo is discussed in this section:

<table>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>**xo**</td>
<td>`PA`</td>
<td>number question</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

The cmavo **xo**, a member of selma'o PA, is used to ask questions whose answers are numbers. Like most Lojban question words, it fills the blank where the answer should go. (See [Sec. 19.5](/en/books/cll/19/#sec-19-5) for more on Lojban questions.)

<span id="ex-18-95"></span><span id="example-random-id-qIiE"></span>
> **li re su'i re du li xo**
> _The-number 2 plus 2 equals the-number what?_
> _What is 2 + 2?_

<span id="ex-18-96"></span><span id="example-random-id-qiIQ"></span>
> **le xomoi prenu cu darxi do**
> _The what-number-th person - hit you?_
> _Which person [as in a police lineup] hit you?_

**xo** can also be combined with other digits to ask questions whose answers are already partly specified. This ability could be very useful in writing tests of elementary arithmetical knowledge:

<span id="ex-18-97"></span><span id="example-random-id-hSee"></span>
> **li remu pi'i xa du li paxono**
> _The-number 25 times 6 equals the-number 1?0_

to which the correct reply would be **mu**, or 5. The ability to utter bare numbers as grammatical Lojban sentences is primarily intended for giving answers to **xo** questions. (Another use, obviously, is for counting off physical objects one by one.)

<span id="sec-18-13"></span><span id="section-subscripts-math"></span>
### Subscripts

The following cmavo is discussed in this section:

<table>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>**xi**</td>
<td>`XI`</td>
<td>subscript</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

Subscripting is a general Lojban feature, not used only in mekso; there are many things that can logically be subscripted, and grammatically a subscript is a free modifier, usable almost anywhere. In particular, of course, mekso variables (lerfu strings) can be subscripted:

<span id="ex-18-98"></span><span id="example-random-id-MT0a"></span>
> **li xy.boixici du li xy.boixipa su'i xy.boixire**
> _The-number x-sub-3 equals the-number x-sub-1 plus x-sub-2._

Subscripts always begin with the flag **xi** (of selma'o XI). **xi** may be followed by a number, a lerfu string, or a general mekso expression in parentheses:

<span id="ex-18-99"></span><span id="example-random-id-qiIs"></span>
> **xy.boixino**

<span id="ex-18-100"></span><span id="example-random-id-qIJ6"></span>
> **xy.boixiny.**

<span id="ex-18-101"></span><span id="example-random-id-qIjf"></span>
> **xy.boixi vei ny. su'i pa [ve'o]**

Note that subscripts attached directly to lerfu words (variables) generally need a **boi** terminating the variable. Free modifiers, of which subscripts are one variety, generally require the explicit presence of an otherwise elidable terminator.

There is no standard way of handling superscripts (other than those used as exponents) or for subscripts or superscripts that come before the main expression. If necessary, further cmavo could be assigned to selma'o XI for these purposes.

The elidable terminator for a subscript is that for a general number or lerfu string, namely **boi**. By convention, a subscript following another subscript is taken to be a sub-subscript:

<span id="ex-18-102"></span><span id="example-random-id-FddL"></span>
> **xy.boi xi by.boi xi vo**

See [Example 18.123](/en/books/cll/18/#ex-18-123) for the standard method of specifying multiple subscripts on a single object.

More information on the uses of subscripts may be found in [Sec. 19.6](/en/books/cll/19/#sec-19-6).

<span id="sec-18-14"></span><span id="section-infix-again"></span>
### Infix operators revisited

The following cmavo are discussed in this section:

<table>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>**tu'o**</td>
<td>`PA`</td>
<td>null operand</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>**ge'a**</td>
<td>`VUhU`</td>
<td>null operator</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>**gei**</td>
<td>`VUhU`</td>
<td>exponential notation</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

The infix operators presented so far have always had exactly two operands, and for more or fewer operands forethought notation has been required. However, it is possible to use an operator in infix style even though it has more or fewer than two operands, through the use of a pair of tricks: the null operand **tu'o** and the null operator **ge'a**. The first is suitable when there are too few operands, the second when there are too many. For example, suppose we wanted to express the numerical negation operator **va'a** in infix form. We would use:

<span id="ex-18-103"></span><span id="example-random-id-8Uh9"></span>
> **li tu'o va'a ny. du li no vu'u ny.**
> _The-number (null) additive-inverse n equals the-number zero minus n._

The **tu'o** fulfills the grammatical requirement for a left operand for the infix use of **va'a**, even though semantically none is needed or wanted.

Finding a suitable example of **ge'a** requires exhibiting a ternary operator, and ternary operators are not common. The operator **gei**, however, has both a binary and a ternary use. As a binary operator, it provides a terse representation of scientific (also called _exponential_) notation. The first operand of **gei** is the exponent, and the second operand is the mantissa or fraction:

<span id="ex-18-104"></span><span id="example-random-id-VjtV"></span>
> **li cinonoki'oki'o du**
> _The-number three-zero-zero-comma-comma equals_

Why are the arguments to **gei** in reverse order from the conventional symbolic notation? So that **gei** can be used in forethought to allow easy specification of a large (or small) imprecise number:

<span id="ex-18-105"></span><span id="example-random-id-zmqy"></span>
> **gei reno**
> _(scientific) two-zero_

Note, however, that although 10 is far and away the most common exponent base, it is not the only possible one. The third operand of **gei**, therefore, is the base, with 10 as the default value. Most computers internally store so-called _floating-point_ numbers using 2 as the exponent base. (This has nothing to do with the fact that computers also represent all integers in base 2; the IBM 360 series used an exponent base of 16 for floating point, although each component of the number was expressed in base 2.) Here is a computer floating-point number with a value of 40:

<span id="ex-18-106"></span><span id="example-random-id-7nMz"></span>
> **papano bi'eju'u re gei**
> _(one-one-zero base 2) scientific_

<span id="sec-18-15"></span><span id="section-vectors-matrices"></span>
### Vectors and matrices

The following cmavo are discussed in this section:

<table>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>**jo'i**</td>
<td>`JOhI`</td>
<td>start vector</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>**te'u**</td>
<td>`TEhU`</td>
<td>end vector</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>**pi'a**</td>
<td>`VUhU`</td>
<td>matrix row combiner</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>**sa'i**</td>
<td>`VUhU`</td>
<td>matrix column combiner</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

A mathematical vector is a list of numbers, and a mathematical matrix is a table of numbers. Lojban considers matrices to be built up out of vectors, which are in turn built up out of operands.

**jo'i**, the only cmavo of selma'o JOhI, is the vector indicator: it has a syntax reminiscent of a forethought operator, but has very high precedence. The components must be simple operands rather than full expressions (unless parenthesized). A vector can have any number of components; **te'u** is the elidable terminator. An example:

<span id="ex-18-107"></span><span id="example-random-id-IVDJ"></span>
> **li jo'i paboi reboi te'u su'i jo'i ciboi voboi -**
> _The-number array( one, two ) plus array( three, four )_

Vectors can be combined into matrices using either **pi'a**, the matrix row operator, or **sa'i**, the matrix column operator. The first combines vectors representing rows of the matrix, and the second combines vectors representing columns of the matrix. Both of them allow any number of arguments: additional arguments are tacked on with the null operator **ge'a**.

Therefore, the _magic square_ matrix

<table>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>8</td>
<td>1</td>
<td>6</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>3</td>
<td>5</td>
<td>7</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>4</td>
<td>9</td>
<td>2</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

can be represented either as:

<span id="ex-18-108"></span><span id="example-random-id-zbJP"></span>
> **jo'i biboi paboi xa pi'a jo'i ciboi muboi ze**
> _the-vector (8 1 6) matrix-row the-vector (3 5 7),_

or as

<span id="ex-18-109"></span><span id="example-random-id-06dx"></span>
> **jo'i biboi ciboi vo sa'i jo'i paboi muboi so**
> _the-vector (8 3 4) matrix-column the-vector (1 5 9),_

The regular mekso operators can be applied to vectors and to matrices, since grammatically both of these are expressions. It is usually necessary to parenthesize matrices when used with operators in order to avoid incorrect groupings. There are no VUhU operators for the matrix operators of inner or outer products, but appropriate operators can be created using a suitable symbolic lerfu word or string prefixed by **ma'o**.

Matrices of more than two dimensions can be built up using either **pi'a** or **sa'i** with an appropriate subscript numbering the dimension. When subscripted, there is no difference between **pi'a** and **sa'i**.

<span id="sec-18-16"></span><span id="section-reverse-polish-notation"></span>
### Reverse Polish notation

The following cmavo is discussed in this section:

<table>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>**fu'a**</td>
<td>`FUhA`</td>
<td>reverse Polish flag</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

So far, the Lojban notational conventions have mapped fairly familiar kinds of mathematical discourse. The use of forethought operators may have seemed odd when applied to _+_, but when applied to _f_ they appear as the usual functional notation. Now comes a sharp break. Reverse Polish (RP) notation represents something completely different; even mathematicians don't use it much. (The only common uses of RP, in fact, are in some kinds of calculators and in the implementation of some programming languages.)

In RP notation, the operator follows the operands. (Polish notation, where the operator precedes its operands, is another name for forethought mekso of the kind explained in [Sec. 18.6](/en/books/cll/18/#sec-18-6).) The number of operands per operator is always fixed. No parentheses are required or permitted. In Lojban, RP notation is always explicitly marked by a **fu'a** at the beginning of the expression; there is no terminator. Here is a simple example:

<span id="ex-18-110"></span><span id="example-random-id-V4xe"></span>
> **li fu'a reboi ci su'i du li mu**
> _the-number (RP!) two, three, plus equals the-number five._

The operands are **re** and **ci**; the operator is **su'i**.

Here is a more complex example:

<span id="ex-18-111"></span><span id="example-random-id-PSpq"></span>
> **li fu'a reboi ci pi'i voboi mu pi'i su'i**
> _the-number (RP!) (two, three, times), (four, five, times), plus_

Here the operands of the first **pi'i** are **re** and **ci**; the operands of the second **pi'i** are **vo** and **mu** (with **boi** inserted where needed), and the operands of the **su'i** are **reboi ci pi'i**, or 6, and **voboi mu pi'i**, or 20. As you can see, it is easy to get lost in the world of reverse Polish notation; on the other hand, it is especially easy for a mechanical listener (who has a deep mental stack and doesn't get lost) to comprehend.

The operands of an RP operator can be any legal mekso operand, including parenthesized mekso that can contain any valid syntax, whether more RP or something more conventional.

In Lojban, RP operators are always parsed with exactly two operands. What about operators which require only one operand, or more than two operands? The null operand **tu'o** and the null operator **ge'a** provide a simple solution. A one-operand operator like **va'a** always appears in a reverse Polish context as **tu'o va'a**. The **tu'o** provides the second operand, which is semantically ignored but grammatically necessary. Likewise, the three-operand version of **gei** appears in reverse Polish as **ge'a gei**, where the **ge'a** effectively merges the 2nd and 3rd operands into a single operand. Here are some examples:

<span id="ex-18-112"></span><span id="example-random-id-qiJp"></span>
> **li fu'a ciboi muboi vu'u**
> _The-number (RP!) (three, five, minus)_

<span id="ex-18-113"></span><span id="example-random-id-qijY"></span>
> **li cinoki'oki'o du**
> _The-number 30-comma-comma equals_

<span id="sec-18-17"></span><span id="section-connectives-within-mekso"></span>
### Logical and non-logical connectives within mekso

The following cmavo are discussed in this section:

<table>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>**.abu**</td>
<td>`BY`</td>
<td>letter</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>**by**</td>
<td>`BY`</td>
<td>letter</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>**cy**</td>
<td>`BY`</td>
<td>letter</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>**fe'a**</td>
<td>`VUhU`</td>
<td>nth root of (default square root)</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>**lo'o**</td>
<td>`LOhO`</td>
<td>terminator for LI</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

As befits a logical language, Lojban has extensive provision for logical connectives within both operators and operands. Full details on logical and non-logical connectives are provided in [Ch. 14](/en/books/cll/14/#ch-14). Operands are connected in afterthought with selma'o A and in forethought with selma'o GA, just like sumti. Operators are connected in afterthought with selma'o JA and in forethought with selma'o GUhA, just like tanru components. This parallelism is no accident.

In addition, A+BO and A+KE constructs are allowed for grouping logically connected operands, and **ke**…**ke'e** is allowed for grouping logically connected operators, although there are no analogues of tanru among the operators.

Despite the large number of rules required to support this feature, it is of relatively minor importance in the mekso scheme of things. [Example 18.114](/en/books/cll/18/#ex-18-114) exhibits afterthought logical connection between operands:

<span id="ex-18-114"></span><span id="example-random-id-e9Xi"></span>
> **vei ci .a vo ve'o prenu cu klama le zarci**
> _( Three or four ) people - go to-the market._

[Example 18.115](/en/books/cll/18/#ex-18-115) is equivalent in meaning, but uses forethought connection:

<span id="ex-18-115"></span><span id="example-random-id-eiTM"></span>
> **vei ga ci gi vo ve'o prenu cu klama le zarci**
> _( Either 3 or 4 ) people - go to-the market._

Note that the mekso here are being used as quantifiers. Lojban requires that any mekso other than a simple number be enclosed in parentheses when used as a quantifier. This rule prevents ambiguities that do not exist when using **li**.

By the way, **li** has an elidable terminator, **lo'o**, which is needed when a **li** sumti is followed by a logical connective that could seem to be within the mekso. For example:

<span id="ex-18-116"></span><span id="example-random-id-LXtp"></span>
> **li re su'i re du**
> _The-number two plus two equals_

Omitting the **lo'o** would cause the parser to assume that another operand followed the **.onai** and reject **lo** as an invalid operand.

Simple examples of logical connection between operators are hard to come by. A contrived example is:

<span id="ex-18-117"></span><span id="example-random-id-YoFg"></span>
> **li re su'i je pi'i re du li vo**
> _The-number two plus and times two equals the-number four._

The forethought-connection form of [Example 18.117](/en/books/cll/18/#ex-18-117) is:

<span id="ex-18-118"></span><span id="example-random-id-ccNn"></span>
> **li re ge su'i gi pi'i re du li vo**
> _the-number two both plus and times two equals the-number four._

Here is a classic example of operand logical connection:

<span id="ex-18-119"></span><span id="example-random-id-k36J"></span>
> **go li .abu bi'epi'i vei xy. te'a re ve'o su'i**
> _If-and-only-if the-number _a_ times ( _x_ power two ) plus_

Note the mixture of styles in [Example 18.119](/en/books/cll/18/#ex-18-119): the negation of b and the square root are represented by forethought and most of the operator precedence by prefixed **bi'e**, but explicit parentheses had to be added to group the numerator properly. In addition, the square root parentheses cannot be removed here in favor of simple **fe'a** and **ku'e** bracketing, because infix operators are present in the operand. Getting [Example 18.119](/en/books/cll/18/#ex-18-119) to parse perfectly using the current parser took several tries: a more relaxed style would dispense with most of the **bi'e** cmavo and just let the standard precedence rules be understood.

Non-logical connection with JOI and BIhI is also permitted between operands and between operators. One use for this construct is to connect operands with **bi'o** to create intervals:

<span id="ex-18-120"></span><span id="example-random-id-Bzf6"></span>
> **li no ga'o bi'o ke'i pa**
> _the-number zero (inclusive) from-to (exclusive) one_
> _the numbers from zero to one, including zero but not including one_

Intervals defined by a midpoint and range rather than beginning and end points can be expressed by **mi'i**:

<span id="ex-18-121"></span><span id="example-random-id-LvBT"></span>
> **li pimu ga'o mi'i ke'i pimu**
> _the-number 0.5 (inclusive) centered-with-range (exclusive) 0.5_

which expresses the same interval as [Example 18.120](/en/books/cll/18/#ex-18-120). Note that the **ga'o** and **ke'i** still refer to the endpoints, although these are now implied rather than expressed. Another way of expressing the same thing:

<span id="ex-18-122"></span><span id="example-random-id-CEvD"></span>
> **li pimu su'i ni'upimu bi'o ke'i ma'upimu**
> _the-number 0.5 plus [-0.5 from-to (exclusive) +0.5]_

Here we have the sum of a number and an interval, which produces another interval centered on the number. As [Example 18.122](/en/books/cll/18/#ex-18-122) shows, non-logical (or logical) connection of operands has higher precedence than any mekso operator.

You can also combine two operands with **ce'o**, the sequence connective of selma'o JOI, to make a compound subscript:

<span id="ex-18-123"></span><span id="example-random-id-eMsd"></span>
> **xy. xi vei by. ce'o dy. [ve'o]**
> __x_ sub (_b_ sequence _d_)_

<span id="sec-18-18"></span><span id="section-lojban-within-mekso"></span>
### Using Lojban resources within mekso

The following cmavo are discussed in this section:

<table>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>**na'u**</td>
<td>`NAhU`</td>
<td>selbri to operator</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>**ni'e**</td>
<td>`NIhE`</td>
<td>selbri to operand</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>**mo'e**</td>
<td>`MOhE`</td>
<td>sumti to operand</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>**te'u**</td>
<td>`TEhU`</td>
<td>terminator for all three</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

One of the mekso design goals requires the ability to make use of Lojban's vocabulary resources within mekso to extend the built-in cmavo for operands and operators. There are three relevant constructs: all three share the elidable terminator **te'u** (which is also used to terminate vectors marked with **jo'i**)

The cmavo **na'u** makes a selbri into an operator. In general, the first place of the selbri specifies the result of the operator, and the other unfilled places specify the operands:

<span id="ex-18-124"></span><span id="example-random-id-k38f"></span>
> **li na'u tanjo te'u**
> _The-number the-operator tangent [end-operator]_

**tanjo** is the gismu for _x₁ is the tangent of x₂_, and the **na'u** here makes it into an operator which is then used in forethought

The cmavo **ni'e** makes a selbri into an operand. The x₁ place of the selbri generally represents a number, and therefore is often a **ni** abstraction, since **ni** abstractions represent numbers. The **ni'e** makes that number available as a mekso operand. A common application is to make equations relating pure dimensions:

<span id="ex-18-125"></span><span id="example-random-id-wCJQ"></span>
> **li ni'e ni clani [te'u]**
> _The-number - quantity-of length -_

The cmavo **mo'e** operates similarly to **ni'e**, but makes a sumti (rather than a selbri) into an operand. This construction is useful in stating equations involving dimensioned numbers:

<span id="ex-18-126"></span><span id="example-random-id-ETmX"></span>
> **li mo'e re ratcu su'i mo'e re ractu**
> _The-number - two rats plus - two rabbits_

Another use is in constructing Lojbanic versions of so-called _folk quantifiers_, such as _a pride of lions_:

<span id="ex-18-127"></span><span id="example-random-id-D4y4"></span>
> **mi viska vei mo'e lo'e lanzu ve'o cinfo**
> _I see ( - the-typical family )-number-of lions._
> _I see a pride of lions._

<span id="sec-18-19"></span><span id="section-other-mekso-uses"></span>
### Other uses of mekso

The following cmavo are discussed in this section:

<table>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>**me'o**</td>
<td>`LI`</td>
<td>the mekso</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>**nu'a**</td>
<td>`NUhA`</td>
<td>operator to selbri</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>**mai**</td>
<td>`MAI`</td>
<td>utterance ordinal</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>**mo'o**</td>
<td>`MAI`</td>
<td>higher order utterance ordinal</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>**roi**</td>
<td>`ROI`</td>
<td>quantified tense</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

So far we have seen mekso used as sumti (with **li**), as quantifiers (often parenthesized), and in MOI and ME-MOI selbri. There are a few other minor uses of mekso within Lojban.

The cmavo **me'o** has the same grammatical use as **li** but slightly different semantics. **li** means _the number which is the value of the mekso ..._, whereas **me'o** just means _the mekso ..._ So it is true that:

<span id="ex-18-128"></span><span id="example-random-id-93Qu"></span>
> **li re su'i re du li vo**
> _The-number two plus two equals the-number four._

but false that:

<span id="ex-18-129"></span><span id="example-random-id-Shbg"></span>
> **me'o re su'i re du me'o vo**
> _The-mekso two plus two equals the-mekso four._
> __2 + 2_=_4__

since the expressions _2 + 2_ and _4_ are not the same. The relationship between **li** and **me'o** is related to that between **la djan.**, the person named John, and **zo .djan.**, the name _John_

The cmavo **nu'a** is the inverse of **na'u**, and allows a mekso operator to be used as a normal selbri, with the place structure:

for as many places as may be required. For example:

<span id="ex-18-130"></span><span id="example-random-id-9idi"></span>
> **li ni'umu cu nu'a va'a li ma'umu**
> _The-number -5 - is-the-operator negation-of the-number +5._

uses **nu'a** to make the operator **va'a** into a two-place bridi

Used together, **nu'a** and **na'u** make it possible to ask questions about mekso operators, even though there is no specific cmavo for an operator question, nor is it grammatical to utter an operator in isolation. Consider [Example 18.131](/en/books/cll/18/#ex-18-131), to which [Example 18.132](/en/books/cll/18/#ex-18-132) is one correct answer:

<span id="ex-18-131"></span><span id="example-random-id-qIKp"></span>
> **li re na'u**
> _The-number two applied-to-selbri_

<span id="ex-18-132"></span><span id="example-random-id-qILi"></span>
> **nu'a su'i**
> _plus_

In [Example 18.131](/en/books/cll/18/#ex-18-131), **na'u mo** is an operator question, because **mo** is the selbri question cmavo and **na'u** makes the selbri into an operator. [Example 18.132](/en/books/cll/18/#ex-18-132) makes the true answer **su'i** into a selbri (which is a legal utterance) with the inverse cmavo **nu'a**. Mechanically speaking, inserting [Example 18.132](/en/books/cll/18/#ex-18-132) into [Example 18.131](/en/books/cll/18/#ex-18-131) produces:

<span id="ex-18-133"></span><span id="example-random-id-M5YX"></span>
> **li re na'u nu'a**
> _The-number two (the-operator the-selbri_

where the **na'u nu'a** cancels out, leaving a truthful bridi

Numerical free modifiers, corresponding to English _firstly_, _secondly_, and so on, can be created by suffixing a member of selma'o MAI to a digit string or a lerfu string. (Digit strings are compound cmavo beginning with a cmavo of selma'o PA, and containing only cmavo of PA or BY; lerfu strings begin with a cmavo of selma'o BY, and likewise contain only PA or BY cmavo.) Here are some examples:

<span id="ex-18-134"></span><span id="example-random-id-qimN"></span>
> **pamai**
> _firstly_

<span id="ex-18-135"></span><span id="example-random-id-qiMz"></span>
> **remai**
> _secondly_

<span id="ex-18-136"></span><span id="example-random-id-qInd"></span>
> **romai**
> _all-ly_
> _lastly_

<span id="ex-18-137"></span><span id="example-random-id-qIoY"></span>
> **ny.mai**
> _nth-ly_

<span id="ex-18-138"></span><span id="example-random-id-qiPq"></span>
> **pasomo'o**
> _nineteenthly (higher order)_

The difference between **mai** and **mo'o** is that **mo'o** enumerates larger subdivisions of a text. Each **mo'o** subdivision can then be divided into pieces and internally numbered with **mai**. If this chapter were translated into Lojban, each section would be numbered with **mo'o**. (See [Sec. 19.7](/en/books/cll/19/#sec-19-7) for more on these words.)

A numerical tense can be created by suffixing a digit string with **roi**. This usage generates tenses corresponding to English _once_, _twice_, and so on. This topic belongs to a detailed discussion of Lojban tenses, and is explained further in [Sec. 10.9](/en/books/cll/10/#sec-10-9).

Note: the elidable terminator **boi** is not used between a number and a member of MAI or ROI.

<span id="sec-18-20"></span><span id="section-explicit-operator-precedence"></span>
### Explicit operator precedence

As mentioned earlier, Lojban does provide a way for the precedences of operators to be explicitly declared, although current parsers do not understand these declarations.

The declaration is made in the form of a metalinguistic comment using **ti'o**, a member of selma'o SEI. **sei**, the other member of SEI, is used to insert metalinguistic comments on a bridi which give information about the discourse which the bridi comprises. The format of a **ti'o** declaration has not been formally established, but presumably would take the form of mentioning a mekso operator and then giving it either an absolute numerical precedence on some pre-established scale, or else specifying relative precedences between new operators and existing operators.

In future, we hope to create an improved machine parser that can understand declarations of the precedences of simple operators belonging to selma'o VUhU. Originally, all operators would have the same precedence. Declarations would have the effect of raising the specified cmavo of VUhU to higher precedence levels. Complex operators formed with **na'u**, **ni'e**, or **ma'o** would remain at the standard low precedence; declarations with respect to them are for future implementation efforts. It is probable that such a parser would have a set of _commonly assumed precedences_ built into it (selectable by a special **ti'o** declaration) that would match mathematical intuition: times higher than plus, and so on.

<span id="sec-18-21"></span><span id="section-miscellany"></span>
### Miscellany

A few other points:

**se** can be used to convert an operator as if it were a selbri, so that its arguments are exchanged. For example:

<span id="ex-18-139"></span><span id="example-random-id-NwYJ"></span>
> **li ci se vu'u vo du li pa**
> _The-number three (inverse) minus four equals the-number one._
> _3 subtracted from 4 equals 1._

The other converters of selma'o SE can also be used on operators with more than two operands, and they can be compounded to create (probably unintelligible) operators as needed.

Members of selma'o NAhE are also legal on an operator to produce a scalar negation of it. The implication is that some other operator would apply to make the bridi true:

<span id="ex-18-140"></span><span id="example-random-id-qIPR"></span>
> **li ci na'e su'i vo du li pare**
> _The-number 3 non- plus 4 equals the-number 12._

<span id="ex-18-141"></span><span id="example-random-id-qiqd"></span>
> **li ci to'e vu'u re du li mu**
> _The-number 3 opposite-of- minus 2 equals the-number 5._

The sense in which _plus_ is the opposite of _minus_ is not a mathematical but rather a linguistic one; negated operators are defined only loosely.

**la'e** and **lu'e** can be used on operands with the usual semantics to get the referent of or a symbol for an operand. Likewise, a member of selma'o NAhE followed by **bo** serves to scalar-negate an operand, implying that some other operand would make the bridi true:

<span id="ex-18-142"></span><span id="example-random-id-3het"></span>
> **li re su'i re du li na'ebo mu**
> _The-number 2 plus 2 equals the-number non- 5._
> _2 + 2 = something other than 5._

The digits 0-9 have rafsi, and therefore can be used in making lujvo. Additionally, all the rafsi have CVC form and can stand alone or together as names:

<span id="ex-18-143"></span><span id="example-random-id-hvGK"></span>
> **la zel. poi gunta la tebes. pu nanmu**
> _Those-named _Seven_ who attack that-named _Thebes_ [past] are-men._
> _The Seven Against Thebes were men._

Of course, there is no guarantee that the name **zel.** is connected with the number rafsi: an alternative which cannot be misconstrued is:

<span id="ex-18-144"></span><span id="example-random-id-pf3n"></span>
> **la zemei poi gunta**
> _Those-named-the Sevensome who attack_

Certain other members of PA also have assigned rafsi: **so'a**, **so'e**, **so'i**, **so'o**, **so'u**, **da'a**, **ro**, **su'e**, **su'o**, **pi**, and **ce'i**. Furthermore, although the cmavo **fi'u** does not have a rafsi as such, it is closely related to the gismu **frinu**, meaning _fraction_; therefore, in a context of numeric rafsi, you can use any of the rafsi for **frinu** to indicate a fraction slash.

A similar convention is used for the cmavo **cu'o** of selma'o MOI, which is closely related to **cunso** (probability); use a rafsi for **cunso** in order to create lujvo based on **cu'o**. The cmavo **mei** and **moi** of MOI have their own rafsi, two each in fact: mem/ mei and mom/ moi respectively.

The grammar of mekso as described so far imposes a rigid distinction between operators and operands. Some flavors of mathematics (lambda calculus, algebra of functions) blur this distinction, and Lojban must have a method of doing the same. An operator can be changed into an operand with **ni'enu'a**, which transforms the operator into a matching selbri and then the selbri into an operand.

To change an operand into an operator, we use the cmavo **ma'o**, already introduced as a means of changing a lerfu string such as **fy.** into an operator. In fact, **ma'o** can be followed by any mekso operand, using the elidable terminator **te'u** if necessary.

There is a potential semantic ambiguity in **ma'o fy. [te'u]** if **fy.** is already in use as a variable: it comes to mean _the function whose value is always f_. However, mathematicians do not normally use the same lerfu words or strings as both functions and variables, so this case should not arise in practice.

<span id="sec-18-22"></span><span id="section-four-score-and-seven"></span>
### Four score and seven: a mekso problem

Abraham Lincoln's Gettysburg Address begins with the words _Four score and seven years ago_. This section exhibits several different ways of saying the number _four score and seven_. (A _score_, for those not familiar with the term, is 20; it is analogous to a _dozen_ for 12.) The trivial way:

<span id="ex-18-145"></span><span id="example-random-id-DzMH"></span>
> **li bize**
> _eight seven_

[Example 18.145](/en/books/cll/18/#ex-18-145) is mathematically correct, but sacrifices the spirit of the English words, which are intended to be complex and formal.

<span id="ex-18-146"></span><span id="example-random-id-HNyL"></span>
> **li vo pi'i reno su'i ze**
> _the-number four times twenty plus seven_

[Example 18.146](/en/books/cll/18/#ex-18-146) is also mathematically correct, but still misses something. _Score_ is not a word for 20 in the same way that _ten_ is a word for 10: it contains the implication of 20 objects. The original may be taken as short for _Four score years and seven years ago_. Thinking of a score as a twentysome rather than as 20 leads to:

<span id="ex-18-147"></span><span id="example-random-id-iwba"></span>
> **li mo'e voboi renomei**
> _the-number [sumti-to-mex] four twentysomes_

In [Example 18.147](/en/books/cll/18/#ex-18-147), **voboi renomei** is a sumti signifying four things each of which are groups of twenty; the **mo'e** and **te'u** then make this sumti into a number in order to allow it to be the operand of **su'i**.

Another approach is to think of _score_ as setting a representation base. There are remnants of base-20 arithmetic in some languages, notably French, in which 87 is _quatre-vingt-sept_, literally _four-twenties-seven_. (This fact makes the Gettysburg Address hard to translate into French!) If _score_ is the representation base, then we have:

<span id="ex-18-148"></span><span id="example-random-id-2C3I"></span>
> **li vo pi'e ze ju'u reno**
> _the-number four ; seven base 20_

Overall, [Example 18.147](/en/books/cll/18/#ex-18-147) probably captures the flavor of the English best. [Example 18.145](/en/books/cll/18/#ex-18-145) and [Example 18.146](/en/books/cll/18/#ex-18-146) are too simple, and [Example 18.148](/en/books/cll/18/#ex-18-148) is too tricky. Nevertheless, all four examples are good Lojban. Pedagogically, these examples illustrate the richness of lojbau mekso: anything that can be said at all, can probably be said in more than one way.

<span id="sec-18-23"></span><span id="section-selmaho-summary"></span>
### mekso selma'o summary

Except as noted, each selma'o has only one cmavo.

<table>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td></td>
<td>`BOI`</td>
<td>elidable terminator for numerals and lerfu strings</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td></td>
<td>`BY`</td>
<td>lerfu for variables and functions (see</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td></td>
<td>`FUhA`</td>
<td>reverse-Polish flag</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td></td>
<td>`GOhA`</td>
<td>includes</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td></td>
<td>`JOhI`</td>
<td>array flag</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td></td>
<td>`KUhE`</td>
<td>elidable terminator for forethought mekso</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td></td>
<td>`LI`</td>
<td>mekso articles (</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td></td>
<td>`MAhO`</td>
<td>make operand into operator</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td></td>
<td>`MOI`</td>
<td>creates mekso selbri (</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td></td>
<td>`MOhE`</td>
<td>make sumti into operand</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td></td>
<td>`NAhU`</td>
<td>make selbri into operator</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td></td>
<td>`NIhE`</td>
<td>make selbri into operand</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td></td>
<td>`NUhA`</td>
<td>make operator into selbri</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td></td>
<td>`PA`</td>
<td>numbers (see</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td></td>
<td>`PEhO`</td>
<td>optional forethought mekso marker</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td></td>
<td>`TEhU`</td>
<td>elidable terminator for NAhU, NIhE, MOhE, MAhO, and JOhI</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td></td>
<td>`VEI`</td>
<td>left parenthesis</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td></td>
<td>`VEhO`</td>
<td>right parenthesis</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td></td>
<td>`VUhU`</td>
<td>operators (see</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td></td>
<td>`XI`</td>
<td>subscript flag</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

<span id="sec-18-24"></span><span id="section-vuhu"></span>
### Complete table of VUhU cmavo, with operand structures

The operand structures specify what various operands (labeled a, b, c, ...) mean. The implied context is forethought, since only forethought operators can have a variable number of operands; however, the same rules apply to infix and RP uses of VUhU.

<table>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td></td>
<td>`su'i`</td>
<td>plus</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td></td>
<td>`pi'i`</td>
<td>times</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td></td>
<td>`vu'u`</td>
<td>minus</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td></td>
<td>`fe'i`</td>
<td>divided by</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td></td>
<td>`ju'u`</td>
<td>number base</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td></td>
<td>`pa'i`</td>
<td>ratio</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td></td>
<td>`fa'i`</td>
<td>reciprocal of/multiplicative inverse</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td></td>
<td>`gei`</td>
<td>scientific notation</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td></td>
<td>`ge'a`</td>
<td>null operator</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td></td>
<td>`de'o`</td>
<td>logarithm</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td></td>
<td>`te'a`</td>
<td>to the power/exponential</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td></td>
<td>`fe'a`</td>
<td>nth root of/inverse power</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td></td>
<td>`cu'a`</td>
<td>absolute value/norm</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td></td>
<td>`ne'o`</td>
<td>factorial</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td></td>
<td>`pi'a`</td>
<td>matrix row vector combiner</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td></td>
<td>`sa'i`</td>
<td>matrix column vector combiner</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td></td>
<td>`ri'o`</td>
<td>integral</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td></td>
<td>`sa'o`</td>
<td>derivative</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td></td>
<td>`fu'u`</td>
<td>non-specific operator</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td></td>
<td>`si'i`</td>
<td>sigma (Σ) summation</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td></td>
<td>`va'a`</td>
<td>negation of/additive inverse</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td></td>
<td>`re'a`</td>
<td>matrix transpose/dual</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

<span id="sec-18-25"></span><span id="section-pa"></span>
### Complete table of PA cmavo: digits, punctuation, and other numbers.

- <table>
  <tbody>
  <tr>
  <td>**no**</td>
  <td></td>
  <td>0</td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
  <td>**pa**</td>
  <td></td>
  <td>1</td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
  <td>**re**</td>
  <td></td>
  <td>2</td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
  <td>**ci**</td>
  <td></td>
  <td>3</td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
  <td>**vo**</td>
  <td></td>
  <td>4</td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
  <td>**mu**</td>
  <td></td>
  <td>5</td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
  <td>**xa**</td>
  <td></td>
  <td>6</td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
  <td>**ze**</td>
  <td></td>
  <td>7</td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
  <td>**bi**</td>
  <td></td>
  <td>8</td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
  <td>**so**</td>
  <td></td>
  <td>9</td>
  </tr>
  </tbody>
  </table>
- <table>
  <tbody>
  <tr>
  <td>**dau**</td>
  <td></td>
  <td>A/10</td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
  <td>**fei**</td>
  <td></td>
  <td>B/11</td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
  <td>**gai**</td>
  <td></td>
  <td>C/12</td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
  <td>**jau**</td>
  <td></td>
  <td>D/13</td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
  <td>**rei**</td>
  <td></td>
  <td>E/14</td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
  <td>**vai**</td>
  <td></td>
  <td>F/15</td>
  </tr>
  </tbody>
  </table>
- <table>
  <tbody>
  <tr>
  <td>**pai**</td>
  <td></td>
  <td>π</td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
  <td>**ka'o**</td>
  <td></td>
  <td>imaginary i</td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
  <td>**te'o**</td>
  <td></td>
  <td>exponential e</td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
  <td>**ci'i**</td>
  <td></td>
  <td>infinity (∞)</td>
  </tr>
  </tbody>
  </table>
- <table>
  <tbody>
  <tr>
  <td>**pi**</td>
  <td></td>
  <td>decimal point</td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
  <td>**ce'i**</td>
  <td></td>
  <td>percentage</td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
  <td>**fi'u**</td>
  <td></td>
  <td>fraction (not division)</td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
  <td>**pi'e**</td>
  <td></td>
  <td>mixed-base point</td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
  <td>**ma'u**</td>
  <td></td>
  <td>plus sign (not addition)</td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
  <td>**ni'u**</td>
  <td></td>
  <td>minus sign (not subtraction)</td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
  <td>**ki'o**</td>
  <td></td>
  <td>thousands comma</td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
  <td>**ra'e**</td>
  <td></td>
  <td>repeating-decimal indicator</td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
  <td>**ji'i**</td>
  <td></td>
  <td>approximation sign</td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
  <td>**ka'o**</td>
  <td></td>
  <td>complex number separator</td>
  </tr>
  </tbody>
  </table>
- <table>
  <tbody>
  <tr>
  <td>**ro**</td>
  <td></td>
  <td>all</td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
  <td>**so'a**</td>
  <td></td>
  <td>almost all</td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
  <td>**so'e**</td>
  <td></td>
  <td>most</td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
  <td>**so'i**</td>
  <td></td>
  <td>many</td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
  <td>**so'o**</td>
  <td></td>
  <td>several</td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
  <td>**so'u**</td>
  <td></td>
  <td>few</td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
  <td>**da'a**</td>
  <td></td>
  <td>all but</td>
  </tr>
  </tbody>
  </table>
- <table>
  <tbody>
  <tr>
  <td>**rau**</td>
  <td></td>
  <td>enough</td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
  <td>**du'e**</td>
  <td></td>
  <td>too few</td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
  <td>**mo'a**</td>
  <td></td>
  <td>too many</td>
  </tr>
  </tbody>
  </table>
- <table>
  <tbody>
  <tr>
  <td>**xo**</td>
  <td></td>
  <td>number question</td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
  <td>**tu'o**</td>
  <td></td>
  <td>null operand</td>
  </tr>
  </tbody>
  </table>

<span id="sec-18-26"></span><span id="section-moi"></span>
### Table of MOI cmavo, with associated rafsi and place structures

<table>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>**mei**</td>
<td></td>
<td>x₁ is a mass formed from a set x₂ of n members, one or more of which is/are x₃, [measured relative to the set x₄/by standard x₄]</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>**moi**</td>
<td></td>
<td>x₁ is the (n)th member of set x₂ when ordered by rule x₃ [by standard x₄]</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>**si'e**</td>
<td></td>
<td>x₁ is an (n)th portion of mass x₂ [by standard x₃]</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>**cu'o**</td>
<td></td>
<td>event x₁ has probability (n) of occurring under conditions x₂ [by standard x₃]; the rafsi is borrowed from</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>**va'e**</td>
<td></td>
<td>x₁ is at scale position (n) on the scale x₂ [by standard x₃]</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>
