## Chapter 20. A Catalogue of selma'o

<span id="ch-20"></span><span id="chapter-catalogue"></span><span id="chapter-catalogue-picture"></span>
<!-- figure: media/chapter-catalogue.gif -->

<span id="sec-20-1"></span><span id="section-index"></span>
### A Catalogue Of selma'o

The following paragraphs list all the selma'o of Lojban, with a brief explanation of what each one is about, and reference to the chapter number where each is explained more fully. As usual, all selma'o names are given in capital letters (with “h” serving as the capital of “'”) and are the names of a representative cmavo, often the most important or the first in alphabetical order. One example is given of each selma'o: for selma'o which have several uses, the most common use is shown.

##### selma'o A ()

Specifies a logical connection (e.g. “and”, “or”, “if”), usually between sumti.

**la--djan. a la--djein. klama le zarci**
_John and/or Jane goes-to the store_

Also used to create vowel lerfu words when followed with “bu”.

##### selma'o BAI ()

May be prefixed to a sumti to specify an additional place, not otherwise present in the place structure of the selbri, and derived from a single place of some other selbri.

**mi tavla bau la--lojban.**
_I speak in-language Lojban._

##### selma'o BAhE ()

Emphasizes the next single word, or marks it as a nonce word (one invented for the occasion).

**la--ba'e--.djordj. klama le zarci**
__George_ goes-to the store._
_It is George who goes to the store._

##### selma'o BE ()

Attaches sumti which fill the place structure of a single unit making up a tanru. Unless otherwise indicated, the sumti fill the x₂, x₃, and successive places in that order. _BE_ is most useful in descriptions formed with _LE_. See _BEI_, _BEhO_.

**mi -- klama be ta -- troci**
_I am-a (goer to that) type-of trier._
_I try to go to that place._

##### selma'o BEI ()

Separates multiple sumti attached by _BE_ to a tanru unit.

**mi -- klama be le zarci bei le zdani be'o -- troci**
_I am-a (goer to the store from the home ) type-of trier._
_I try to go from the home to the market._

##### selma'o BEhO ()

Elidable terminator for _BE_. Terminates sumti that are attached to a tanru unit.

**mi -- klama be le zarci be'o -- troci**
_I am-a (goer to the market ) type-of trier._
_I try to go to the market._

##### selma'o BIhE ()

Prefixed to a mathematical operator to mark it as higher priority than other mathematical operators, binding its operands more closely.

**li ci bi'e pi'i vo su'i mu du li paze**
_The-number 3 [priority] times 4 plus 5 equals the-number 17._
_3 × 4 + 5 = 17_

##### selma'o BIhI ()

Joins sumti or tanru units (as well as some other things) to form intervals. See _GAhO_.

**mi ca sanli la--drezdn. bi'i la--frankfurt.**
_I [present] stand-on-surface Dresden [interval] Frankfurt._
_I am standing between Dresden and Frankfurt._

##### selma'o BO (, 
      , 
      )

Joins tanru units, binding them together closely. Also used to bind logically or non-logically connected phrases, sentences, etc. _BO_ is always high precedence and right-grouping.

**ta cmalu -- nixli bo ckule**
_That is-a-small type-of (girl type-of school)._
_That is a small school for girls._

##### selma'o BOI ()

Elidable terminator for _PA_ or _BY_. Used to terminate a number (string of numeric cmavo) or lerfu string (string of letter words) when another string immediately follows.

**li re du li vu'u vo--boi -- re**
_The-number two equals the-number the-difference-of four and two._

##### selma'o BU ()

A suffix which can be attached to any word, typically a word representing a letter of the alphabet or else a name, to make a word for a symbol or a different letter of the alphabet. In particular, attached to single-vowel cmavo to make words for vowel letters.

**.abu .ebu .ibu .obu .ubu .ybu**
_a, e, i, o, u, y._

##### selma'o BY ()

Words representing the letters of the Lojban alphabet, plus various shift words which alter the interpretation of other letter words. Terminated by BOI.

**.abu tavla by -- le -- la--.ibymym. skami**
_A talks-to B about the of- IBM computers._
_A talks to B about IBM computers._

##### selma'o CAI ()

Indicates the intensity of an emotion: maximum, strong, weak, or not at all. Typically follows another particle which specifies the emotion.

**.ei cai mi klama le zarci**
_[Obligation!] [Intense!] I go-to the market._
_I must go to the market._

##### selma'o CAhA ()

Specifies whether a bridi refers to an actual fact, a potential (achieved or not), or merely an innate capability.

**ro datka ka'e flulimna**
_All ducks [capability] are-float-swimmers._
_All ducks have the capability of swimming by floating._

##### selma'o CEI ()

Assigns a selbri definition to one of the five pro-bridi gismu: “broda”, “brode”, “brodi”, “brodo”, or “brodu”, for later use.

_This is a plastic cat-food can cover, or thingy._

_The green thingy is large. The red thingy is small._

##### selma'o CEhE (, 
      )

Joins multiple terms into a termset. Termsets are used to associate several terms for logical connectives, for equal quantifier scope, or for special constructs in tenses.

**mi ce'e do pe'e je la--djan. ce'e la--djeimyz. cu pendo**
_I [,] you [joint] and John [,] James -- are-friends-of._
_I am a friend of you, and John is a friend of James._

##### selma'o CO ()

When inserted between the components of a tanru, inverts it, so that the following tanru unit modifies the previous one.

**mi troci co klama le zarci -- le zdani**
_I am-a-trier of-type (goer-to the market from the house)._
_I try to go to the market from the house._

##### selma'o COI (, 
      )

When prefixed to a name, description, or sumti, produces a vocative: a phrase which indicates who is being spoken to (or who is speaking). Vocatives are used in conversational protocols, including greeting, farewell, and radio communication. Terminated by _DOhU_. See _DOI_.

**coi .djan.**
_Greetings, John._

##### selma'o CU ()

Separates the selbri of a bridi from any sumti which precede it. Never strictly necessary, but often useful to eliminate various elidable terminators.

**le gerku cu klama le zarci**
_The dog -- goes-to the store._

##### selma'o CUhE ()

Forms a question which asks when, where, or in what mode the rest of the bridi is true. See _PU_, _CAhA_, _TAhE_, and _BAI_.

**do cu'e klama le zarci**
_You [When/Where?] go-to the store?_
_When are you going to the store?_

##### selma'o DAhO ()

Cancels the assigned significance of all sumti cmavo (of selma'o _KOhA_) and bridi cmavo (of selma'o _GOhA_).

##### selma'o DOI ()

The non-specific vocative indicator. May be used with or without _COI_. No pause is required between “doi” and a following name. See _DOhU_.

**doi frank. mi tavla do**
_O Frank, I speak-to you._
_Frank, I'm talking to you._

##### selma'o DOhU ()

Elidable terminator for _COI_ or _DOI_. Signals the end of a vocative.

**coi do'u**
_Greetings [terminator]_
_Greetings, O unspecified one!_

##### selma'o FA ()

Prefix for a sumti, indicating which numbered place in the place structure the sumti belongs in; overrides word order.

**fa mi cu klama fi la--.atlantas.**
_x1= I -- go x3= Atlanta_

**… fe la--bastn. fo le dargu fu le karce**
_… x2= Boston x4= the road x5= the car._
_I go from Atlanta to Boston via the road using the car._

##### selma'o FAhA ()

Specifies the direction in which, or toward which (when marked with _MOhI_) or along which (when prefixed by _VEhA_ or _VIhA_) the action of the bridi takes place.

**le nanmu zu'a batci le gerku**
_The man [left] bites the dog._
_To my left, the man bites the dog._

##### selma'o FAhO ()

A mechanical signal, outside the grammar, indicating that there is no more text. Useful in talking to computers.

##### selma'o FEhE ()

Indicates that the following interval modifier (using _TAhE_, _ROI_, or _ZAhO_) refers to space rather than time.

**ko vi'i fe'e di'i sombo le gurni**
_You-imperative [1-dimensional] [space] [regularly] sow the grain._
_Sow the grain in a line and evenly!_

##### selma'o FEhU ()

Elidable terminator for _FIhO_. Indicates the end of an ad hoc modal tag: the tagged sumti immediately follows.

**mi viska do fi'o kanla [fe'u] le zunle**
_I see you [modal] eye : the left-thing_
_I see you with the left eye._

##### selma'o FIhO ()

When placed before a selbri, transforms the selbri into a modal tag, grammatically and semantically equivalent to a member of selma'o _BAI_. Terminated by _FEhU_.

**mi viska do fi'o kanla le zunle**
_I see you with eye the left-thing_
_I see you with my left eye._

##### selma'o FOI ()

Signals the end of a compound alphabet letter word that begins with _TEI_. Not an elidable terminator.

**tei .ebu .akut.--bu foi**
_( “e” “acute” )_
_the letter “e” with an acute accent_

##### selma'o FUhA ()

Indicates that the following mathematical expression is to be interpreted as reverse Polish (RP), a mode in which mathematical operators follow their operands.

**li fu'a reboi re[boi] su'i du li vo**
_the-number [RP!] two, two, plus equals the-number four_
_2 + 2 = 4_

##### selma'o FUhE ()

Indicates that the following indicator(s) of selma'o _UI_ affect not the preceding word, as usual, but rather all following words until a _FUhO_.

**mi viska le fu'e .ia blanu zdani fu'o ponse**
_I see the [start] [belief] blue house [end] possessor_
_I see the owner of a blue house, or what I believe to be one._

##### selma'o FUhO ()

Cancels all indicators of selma'o _UI_ which are in effect.

**mi viska le fu'e .ia blanu zdani fu'o ponse**
_I see the [start] [belief] blue house [end] possessor._
_I see the owner of what I believe to be a blue house._

##### selma'o GA ()

Indicates the beginning of two logically connected sumti, bridi-tails, or various other things. Logical connections include “both ... and”, “either ... or”, “if ... then”, and so on. See _GI_.

_Either John is a man or James is a woman (or both)._

##### selma'o GAhO ()

Specifies whether an interval specified by _BIhI_ includes or excludes its endpoints. Used in pairs before and after the _BIhI_ cmavo, to specify the nature of both the left- and the right-hand endpoints.

**mi ca sanli la--drezdn.**
_I [present] stand Dresden_

**… ga'o bi'i ga'o la--frankfurt.**
_… [inclusive] [interval] [inclusive] Frankfurt._
_I am standing between Dresden and Frankfurt, inclusive of both._

##### selma'o GEhU ()

Elidable terminator for _GOI_. Marks the end of a relative phrase. See _KUhO_.

**la--djan. goi ko'a ge'u blanu**
_John (referred--to--as it-1 ) is-blue._

##### selma'o GI ()

Separates two logically or non-logically connected sumti, tanru units, bridi-tails, or other things, when the prefix is a forethought connective involving _GA_, _GUhA_, or _JOI_.

_(It is true that) both John is a man and James is a woman._

##### selma'o GIhA ()

Specifies a logical connective (e.g. “and”, “or”, “if”) between two bridi-tails: a bridi-tail is a selbri with any associated following sumti, but not including any preceding sumti.

**mi klama le zarci gi'e nelci la--djan.**
_I go-to the market and like John._

##### selma'o GOI ()

Specifies the beginning of a relative phrase, which associates a subordinate sumti (following) to another sumti (preceding). Terminated by _GEhU_ See _NOI_.

**la--djan. goi ko'a cu blanu**
_John (referred--to--as it-1) -- is-blue._

##### selma'o GOhA ()

A general selma'o for all cmavo which can take the place of brivla. There are several groups of these.

_A: I'm going to the market._

##### selma'o GUhA ()

Indicates the beginning of two logically connected tanru units. Takes the place of _GA_ when forming logically-connected tanru. See _GI_.

**la--.alis. gu'e ricfu gi blanu**
_Alice is--both rich and blue._

##### selma'o I ()

Separates two sentences from each other.

**mi klama le zarci .i mi klama le zdani**
_I go-to the market . I go-to the house._

##### selma'o JA ()

Specifies a logical connection (e.g. “and”, “or”, “if”) between two tanru units, mathematical operands, tenses, or abstractions.

**ti blanu je zdani**
_This is-blue and a-house._

##### selma'o JAI ()

When followed by a tense or modal, creates a conversion operator attachable to a selbri which exchanges the modal place with the x₁ place of the selbri. When alone, is a conversion operator exchanging the x₁ place of the selbri (which should be an abstract sumti) with one of the places of the abstracted-over bridi.

**mi jai--gau galfi le bitmu se--skari**
_I am-the-actor-in modifying the wall color._
_I act so as to modify the wall color._

##### selma'o JOI ()

Specifies a non-logical connection (e.g. together-with-as-mass, -set, or -sequence) between two sumti, tanru units, or various other things. When immediately followed by _GI_, provides forethought non-logical connection analogous to _GA_.

**la--djan. joi la--.alis. cu bevri le pipno**
_John massed-with Alice -- carry the piano._

##### selma'o JOhI ()

Indicates that the following mathematical operands (a list terminated by _TEhU_) form a mathematical vector (one-dimensional array).

**li jo'i paboi reboi te'u su'i jo'i ciboi voboi du**
_The-number array( one, two ) plus array( three, four) equals_

**li jo'i voboi xaboi**
_the-number array( four, six)._
_(1,2) + (3,4) = (4,6)_

##### selma'o KE ()

Groups everything between itself and a following _KEhE_ for purposes of logical connection, tanru construction, or other purposes. _KE_ and _KEhE_ are not used for mathematical (see _VEI_ and _VEhO_) or discursive (see _TO_ and _TOI_) purposes.

**ta ke melbi cmalu ke'e nixli ckule**
_That is-a-( pretty little ) girl school._
_That is a school for girls who are pretty in their littleness._

##### selma'o KEI ()

Elidable terminator for _NU_. Marks the end of an abstraction bridi.

**la--djan. cu nu sonci kei -- djica**
_John -- is-an-(event-of being-a-soldier ) type-of desirer._
_John wants to be a soldier._

##### selma'o KEhE ()

Elidable terminator for _KE_. Marks the end of a grouping.

**ta ke melbi cmalu ke'e nixli ckule**
_That is-a-( pretty little ) girl school._
_That is a school for girls who are pretty in their littleness._

##### selma'o KI ()

When preceded by a tense or modal, makes it “sticky”, so that it applies to all further bridi until reset by another appearance of _KI_. When alone, eliminates all sticky tenses.

##### selma'o KOhA ()

A general selma'o which contains all cmavo which can substitute for sumti. These cmavo are divided into several groups.

**le blanu zdani goi ko'a cu barda**
_The blue house (referred--to--as it-1) -- is-big._

**… .i ko'a na cmamau ti**
_… -- It-1 is-not smaller-than this-thing._

##### selma'o KU (, 
      )

Elidable terminator for _LE_ and some uses of _LA_. Indicates the end of a description sumti. Also used after a tense or modal to indicate that no sumti follows, and in the compound _NA_+ _KU_ to indicate natural language-style negation.

**le prenu ku -- le zdani ku klama**
_The person , to the house , goes._
_The person goes to the house._

##### selma'o KUhE ()

Elidable terminator for _PEhO_: indicates the end of a forethought mathematical expression (one in which the operator precedes the operands).

**li pe'o su'i reboi reboi re[boi] ku'e**
_The-number [forethought] the-sum-of two two two [end]_

**… du li xa**
_… equals the-number six._

##### selma'o KUhO ()

Elidable terminator for _NOI_. Indicates the end of a relative clause.

**le zdani poi blanu ku'o barda**
_The house that( is-blue ) is-big._

##### selma'o LA ()

Descriptors which change name words (or selbri) into sumti which identify people or things by name. Similar to _LE_. May be terminated with _KU_ if followed by a description selbri.

**la--kikeros. du la--tulis.**
_Cicero is Tully._

##### selma'o LAU ()

Combines with the following alphabetic letter to represent a single marker: change from lower to upper case, change of font, punctuation, etc.)

**tau sy .ibu**
_[single-shift] “s” “i”_
_Si (chemical symbol for silicon)_

##### selma'o LAhE ()

Qualifiers which, when prefixed to a sumti, change it into another sumti with related meaning. Qualifiers can also consist of a cmavo from selma'o _NAhE_ plus _BO_. Terminated by _LUhU_.

**mi viska la'e zoi .kuot. A--Tale--of--Two--Cities .kuot**
_I see that-represented-by the-text “ A--Tale--of--Two--Cities ”._
_I see the book “A Tale of Two Cities”._

##### selma'o LE ()

Descriptors which make selbri into sumti which describe or specify things that fit into the x₁ place of the selbri. Terminated by _KU_. See _LA_.

**le gerku cu klama le zdani**
_The dog -- goes-to the house._

##### selma'o LEhU ()

Indicates the end of a quotation begun with _LOhU_. Not an elidable terminator.

**lo'u mi--du--do--du--mi le'u cu na lojbo drani**
_[quote] mi--du--do--du--mi [unquote] -- is-not Lojbanically correct._
_“mi du do du mi” is not correct Lojban._

##### selma'o LI ()

Descriptors which change numbers or other mathematical expressions into sumti which specify numbers or numerical expressions. Terminated by _LOhO_.

**li re vu'u re na du li vo su'i vo**
_The-number 2 minus 2 not equals the-number 4 plus 4._
_2 - 2 ≠ 4 + 4_

##### selma'o LIhU ()

Elidable terminator for _LU_. Indicates the end of a text quotation.

**mi cusku lu mi klama le zarci li'u**
_I express [quote] I go-to the market [end-quote]._

##### selma'o LOhO ()

Elidable terminator for _LI_. Indicates the end of a mathematical expression used in a _LI_ description.

**li vo lo'o li ci lo'o cu zmadu**
_The-number 4 [end-number], the-number 3 [end-number], -- is-greater._
_4 > 3_

##### selma'o LOhU ()

Indicates the beginning of a quotation (a sumti) which is grammatical as long as the quoted material consists of Lojban words, whether they form a text or not. Terminated by _LEhU_.

**do cusku lo'u mi--du--do--du--ko'a le'u**
_You express [quote] mi--du--do--du--ko'a [end-quote]._
_You said, “mi du do du ko'a”._

##### selma'o LU ()

Indicates the beginning of a quotation (a sumti) which is grammatical only if the quoted material also forms a grammatical Lojban text. Terminated by _LIhU_.

**mi cusku lu mi klama le zarci li'u**
_I express [quote] I go-to the market [end-quote]._

##### selma'o LUhU ()

Elidable terminator for _LAhE_ and _NAhE_+ _BO_. Indicates the end of a qualified sumti.

**mi viska la'e lu barda gerku li'u lu'u**
_I see the-referent-of [quote] big dog [end-quote] [end-ref]_
_I saw “Big Dog” [not the words, but a book or movie]._

##### selma'o MAI (, 
      )

When suffixed to a number or string of letter words, produces a free modifier which serves as an index number within a text.

**pamai mi pu klama le zarci**
_1-thly, I [past] go-to the market._
_First, I went to the market._

##### selma'o MAhO ()

Produces a mathematical operator from a letter or other operand. Terminated by _TEhU_. See _VUhU_.

**ma'o fy. boi xy.**
_[operator] f -- x_
__f(x)__

##### selma'o ME (, 
      )

Produces a tanru unit from a sumti, which is applicable to the things referenced by the sumti. Terminated by _MEhU_.

**ta me--la--ford. karce**
_That is-a-Ford-type car_
_That's a Ford car._

##### selma'o MEhU ()

The elidable terminator for _ME_. Indicates the end of a sumti converted to a tanru unit.

_That's a me type of house._

##### selma'o MOI (, 
      )

Suffixes added to numbers or other quantifiers to make various numerically-based selbri.

**la--djan. joi la--frank. cu bruna -- remei**
_John in-a-mass-with Frank -- are-a-brother type-of twosome._
_John and Frank are two brothers._

##### selma'o MOhE ()

Produces a mathematical operand from a sumti; used to make dimensioned units. Terminated by _TEhU_.

**li mo'e re ratcu su'i mo'e re ractu**
_The-number [operand] two rats plus [operand] two rabbits_

**… cu du li mo'e vo danlu**
_… -- equals the-number [operand] four animals._
_2 rats + 2 rabbits = 4 animals._

##### selma'o MOhI ()

A tense flag indicating movement in space, in a direction specified by a following _FAhA_ cmavo.

**le verba mo'i ri'u cadzu le bisli**
_The child [movement] [right] walks-on the ice._
_The child walks toward my right on the ice._

##### selma'o NA (, 
      )

Contradictory negators, asserting that a whole bridi is false (or true).

_It is not true that I go to the market._

Also used to construct logical connective compound cmavo.

##### selma'o NAI (, 
      )

Negates the previous word, but can only be used with certain selma'o as specified by the grammar.

##### selma'o NAhE ()

Scalar negators, modifying a selbri or a sumti to a value other than the one stated, the opposite of the one stated, etc. Also used with following _BO_ to construct a sumti qualifier; see _LAhE_.

**ta na'e blanu zdani**
_That is-a-non- blue house._
_That is a house which is other than blue._

##### selma'o NAhU ()

Creates a mathematical operator from a selbri. Terminated by _TEhU_. See _VUhU_.

**li na'u tanjo te'u**
_The-number the-operator( tangent )_

**vei pai fe'i re [ve'o] du li ci'i**
_( π / 2 ) = the-number infinity._
_tan(π/2) = ∞_

##### selma'o NIhE ()

Creates a mathematical operand from a selbri, usually a “ni” abstraction. Terminated by _TEhU_.

**li ni'e ni clani [te'u] pi'i**
_The-number -- quantity-of length -- times_

**ni'e ni ganra [te'u] pi'i**
_-- quantity-of width -- times_

**… ni'e ni condi te'u du li ni'e ni canlu**
_… -- quantity-of depth -- equals the-number -- quantity-of volume._
_Length × Width × Depth = Volume_

##### selma'o NIhO ()

Marks the beginning of a new paragraph, and indicates whether it contains old or new subject matter.

##### selma'o NOI ()

Introduces relative clauses. The following bridi modifies the preceding sumti. Terminated by _KUhO_. See _GOI_.

**le zdani poi blanu cu cmalu**
_The house which is-blue -- is-small._

##### selma'o NU ()

Abstractors which, when prefixed to a bridi, create abstraction selbri. Terminated by _KEI_.

**la--djan. cu djica le nu sonci [kei]**
_John -- desires the event-of being-a-soldier._

##### selma'o NUhA ()

Creates a selbri from a mathematical operator. See _VUhU_.

**li ni'umu cu nu'a--va'a li ma'umu**
_The-number -5 -- is-the-negation-of the-number +5_

##### selma'o NUhI (, 
      )

Marks the beginning of a termset, which is used to make simultaneous claims involving two or more different places of a selbri. Terminated by _NUhU_.

**mi klama nu'i ge -- le zarci -- le briju**
_I go [start] both to the market from the office_

**… nu'u gi -- le zdani -- le ckule [nu'u]**
_… [joint] and to the house from the school._

##### selma'o NUhU ()

Elidable terminator for _NUhI_. Marks the end of a termset.

**mi klama nu'i ge -- le zarci -- le briju**
_I go [start] both to the market from the office_

**… nu'u gi -- le zdani -- le ckule [nu'u]**
_… [joint] and to the house from the school._

##### selma'o PA ()

Digits and related quantifiers (some, all, many, etc.). Terminated by _BOI_.

**mi speni re ninmu**
_I am-married-to two women._

##### selma'o PEhE ()

Precedes a logical or non-logical connective that joins two termsets. Termsets (see _CEhE_) are used to associate several terms for logical connectives, for equal quantifier scope, or for special constructs in tenses.

**mi ce'e do pe'e je la--djan. ce'e la--djeimyz. cu pendo**
_I [,] you [joint] and John [,] James -- are-friends-of._
_I am a friend of you, and John is a friend of James._

##### selma'o PEhO ()

An optional signal of forethought mathematical operators, which precede their operands. Terminated by _KUhE_.

**li vo du li pe'o su'i reboi re**
_The-number four equals the-number [forethought] sum-of two two._

##### selma'o PU ()

Specifies simple time directions (future, past, or neither).

**mi pu klama le zarci**
_I [past] go-to the market._
_I went to the market._

##### selma'o RAhO ()

The pro-bridi update flag: changes the meaning of sumti implicitly attached to a pro-bridi (see _GOhA_) to fit the current context rather than the original context.

_A: I [future] wash my car._

##### selma'o ROI ()

When suffixed to a number, makes an extensional tense (e.g. once, twice, many times).

**mi reroi klama le zarci**
_I twice go-to the market._

##### selma'o SA ()

Erases the previous phrase or sentence.

**mi klama sa do klama le zarci**
_I go, er, you go-to the market._

##### selma'o SE (, 
      )

Converts a selbri, rearranging the order of places by exchanging the x₁ place with a specified numbered place.

**le zarci cu se--klama mi**
_The market -- is-gone-to-by me._

Also used in constructing connective and modal compound cmavo.

##### selma'o SEI ()

Marks the beginning of metalinguistic insertions which comment on the main bridi. Terminated by _SEhU_.

**la--frank. prami sei -- gleki [se'u] la--djein.**
_Frank loves ( [he] is-happy ) Jane._

##### selma'o SEhU ()

Elidable terminator for _SEI_ and _SOI_. Ends metalinguistic insertions.

**la--frank. prami sei -- gleki se'u la--djein.**
_Frank loves ( [he] is-happy ) Jane._

##### selma'o SI ()

Erases the previous single word.

**mi si do klama le zarci**
_I, er, you go-to the market._

##### selma'o SOI ()

Marks reciprocity between two sumti (like “vice versa” in English).

**mi prami do soi mi**
_I love you [reciprocally] me._
_I love you and vice versa._

##### selma'o SU ()

Closes and erases the entire previous discourse.

##### selma'o TAhE ()

A tense modifier specifying frequencies within an interval of time or space (regularly, habitually, etc.).

**le verba ta'e klama le ckule**
_The child habitually goes-to the school._

##### selma'o TEI ()

Signals the beginning of a compound letter word, which acts grammatically like a single letter. Compound letter words end with the non-elidable selma'o _FOI_.

**tei .ebu .akut.--bu foi**
_( “e” “acute” )_
_the letter “e” with an acute accent_

##### selma'o TEhU ()

Elidable terminator for _JOhI_, _MAhO_, _MOhE_, _NAhU_, or _NIhE_. Marks the end of a mathematical conversion construct.

**li jo'i paboi reboi te'u su'i jo'i ciboi voboi du**
_The-number array( one, two ) plus array( three, four) equals_

**li jo'i voboi xaboi**
_the-number array( four, six)._
_(1,2) + (3,4) = (4,6)_

##### selma'o TO ()

Left discursive parenthesis: allows inserting a digression. Terminated by _TOI_.

**doi lisas. mi djica le nu**
_O Lisa, I desire the event-of_

**… to doi frank. ko sisti toi do viska le mlatu**
_… ( O Frank, [imperative] stop! ) you see the cat._
_Lisa, I want you to (Frank! Stop!) see the cat._

##### selma'o TOI ()

Elidable terminator for _TO_. The right discursive parenthesis.

**doi lisas. mi djica le nu**
_O Lisa, I desire the event-of_

**… to doi frank. ko sisti toi do viska le mlatu**
_… ( O Frank, [imperative] stop! ) you see the cat._
_Lisa, I want you to (Frank! Stop!) see the cat._

##### selma'o TUhE ()

Groups multiple sentences or paragraphs into a logical unit. Terminated by _TUhU_.

**lo xagmau zo'u tu'e ganai cidja gi citno**
_Some best : [start] If food, then new._

**… .i ganai vanju gi tolci'o [tu'u]**
_… -- If wine, then old._
_As for what is best: if food, then new [is best]; if wine, then old [is best]._

##### selma'o TUhU ()

Elidable terminator for _TUhE_. Marks the end of a multiple sentence group.

##### selma'o UI ()

Particles which indicate the speaker's emotional state or source of knowledge, or the present stage of discourse.

**.ui la--djan. klama**
_[Happiness!] John is-coming._
_Hurrah! John is coming!_

##### selma'o VA ()

A tense indicating distance in space (near, far, or neither).

**le nanmu va batci le gerku**
_The man [medium-distance] bites the dog._
_Over there the man is biting the dog._

##### selma'o VAU ()

Elidable terminator for a simple bridi, or for each bridi-tail of a _GIhA_ logical connection.

**mi dunda le cukta [vau] gi'e**
_I (give the book ) and_

**lebna lo rupnu vau -- do [vau]**
_(take some currency-units ) to/from you._

##### selma'o VEI ()

Left mathematical parenthesis: groups mathematical operations. Terminated by _VEhO_.

**li vei ny. su'i pa ve'o**
_The-number ( “n” plus one )_

**pi'i vei ny. su'i pa [ve'o] du**
_times ( “n” plus one ) equals_

**li ny. [bi'e] te'a re**
_the-number n [priority] power two_

**su'i re bi'e pi'i ny. su'i pa**
_plus two [priority] times “n” plus 1._
_(n + 1)(n + 1) = n <sup>2</sup> + 2n + 1_

##### selma'o VEhA ()

A tense indicating the size of an interval in space (long, medium, or short).

##### selma'o VEhO ()

Elidable terminator for _VEI_: right mathematical parenthesis.

**li vei ny. su'i pa ve'o pi'i**
_The-number ( “n” plus one ) times_

**vei ny. su'i pa [ve'o] du**
_( “n” plus one ) equals_

**li ny. [bi'e] te'a re su'i**
_the-number n [priority] power two plus_

**re bi'e pi'i ny. su'i pa**
_two [priority] times “n” plus 1._
_(n + 1)(n + 1) = n <sup>2</sup> + 2n + 1_

##### selma'o VIhA ()

A tense indicating dimensionality in space (line, plane, volume, or space-time interval).

**le verba ve'a**
_The child [medium-space-interval]_

**… vi'a cadzu le bisli**
_… [2-dimensional] walks-on the ice._
_In a medium-sized area, the child walks on the ice._

##### selma'o VUhO ()

Attaches relative clauses or phrases to a whole (possibly connected) sumti, rather than simply to the leftmost portion of the sumti.

**la--frank. ce la--djordj. vu'o noi gidva cu zvati le kumfa**
_Frank [in-set-with] George , which are-guides , are-in the room._
_Frank and George, who are guides, are in the room._

##### selma'o VUhU ()

Mathematical operators (e.g. +, −). See _MAhO_.

**li mu vu'u re du li ci**
_The-number 5 minus 2 equals the-number 3._
_5 − 2 = 3_

##### selma'o XI ()

The subscript marker: the following number or lerfu string is a subscript for whatever precedes it.

**xy. xi re**
_x sub 2_
_x<sub>2</sub>_

##### selma'o Y ()

Hesitation noise: content-free, but holds the floor or continues the conversation. It is different from silence in that silence may be interpreted as having nothing more to say.

**doi .y. .y. .djan**
_O, uh, uh, John!_

##### selma'o ZAhO ()

A tense modifier specifying the contour of an event (e.g. beginning, ending, continuing).

**mi pu'o damba**
_I [inchoative] fight._
_I'm on the verge of fighting._

##### selma'o ZEI ()

A morphological glue word, which joins the two words it stands between into the equivalent of a lujvo.

**ta xy. zei kantu kacma**
_That is-an-(X - ray) camera._
_That is an X-ray camera._

##### selma'o ZEhA ()

A tense indicating the size of an interval in time (long, medium, or short).

**mi pu ze'i citka**
_I [past] [short-interval] eat._
_I ate for a little while._

##### selma'o ZI ()

A tense indicating distance in time (a long, medium or short time ago or in the future).

**mi pu zi citka**
_I [past] [short-distance] eat._
_I ate a little while ago._

##### selma'o ZIhE ()

Joins multiple relative phrases or clauses which apply to the same sumti. Although generally translated with “and”, it is not considered a logical connective.

**mi ponse pa gerku ku poi blabi**
_I own one dog -- such-that it-is-white_

**… zi'e noi mi prami ke'a**
_… and such-that-incidentally I love it._
_I own a dog that is white and which, incidentally, I love._

##### selma'o ZO ()

Single-word quotation: quotes the following single Lojban word.

**zo si cu lojbo valsi**
_The-word “si” -- is-a-Lojbanic word._

##### selma'o ZOI ()

Non-Lojban quotation: quotes any text using a delimiting word (which can be any single Lojban word) placed before and after the text. The delimiting word must not appear in the text, and must be separated from the text by pauses.

**zoi .kuot. Socrates--is--mortal .kuot. cu glico jufra**
_The-text “ Socrates--is--mortal ” -- is-an-English sentence._

##### selma'o ZOhU (, )

Separates a logical prenex from a bridi or group of sentences to which it applies. Also separates a topic from a comment in topic/comment sentences.

**su'o da poi remna**
_For-at-least-one X which is-a-human,_

**… ro de poi finpe zo'u da prami de**
_… for-all Ys which are-fish : X loves Y_
_There is someone who loves all fish._
