## Chapter 6. To Speak Of Many Things: The Lojban sumti

<span id="ch-6"></span><span id="chapter-sumti"></span><span id="chapter-sumti-picture"></span>
<!-- figure: media/chapter-sumti.gif -->

<span id="sec-6-1"></span><span id="section-simple-sumti-kinds"></span>
### The five kinds of simple sumti

If you understand anything about Lojban, you know what a sumti is by now, right? An argument, one of those things that fills the places of simple Lojban sentences like:

<span id="ex-6-1"></span><span id="example-random-id-VKU6"></span>
> **mi klama le zarci**
> _I go-to the market_

In [Example 6.1](/en/books/cll/6/#ex-6-1), **mi** and **le zarci** are the sumti. It is easy to see that these two sumti are not of the same kind: **mi** is a pro-sumti (the Lojban analogue of a pronoun) referring to the speaker, whereas **le zarci** is a description which refers to something described as being a market.

There are five kinds of simple sumti provided by Lojban:

1. descriptions like **le zarci**, which usually begin with a descriptor (called a **gadri** in Lojban) such as **le**;
2. pro-sumti, such as **mi**;
3. names, such as **la lojban.**, which usually begin with **la**;
4. quotations, which begin with **lu**, **lo'u**, **zo**, or **zoi**;
5. pure numbers, which usually begin with **li**.

Here are a few examples of each kind of sumti:

<span id="ex-6-2"></span><span id="example-random-id-Dx1s"></span>
> **e'osai ko sarji la lojban.**
> _[request]--[!] You--[imperative] support that-named Lojban._
> _Please support Lojban!_

[Example 6.2](/en/books/cll/6/#ex-6-2) exhibits **ko**, a pro-sumti; and **la lojban.**, a name.

<span id="ex-6-3"></span><span id="example-random-id-v1mS"></span>
> **mi cusku lu e'osai li'u le tcidu**
> _I express [quote] [request]--[!] [unquote] to-the reader._
> _I express _Please!_ to the reader._

[Example 6.3](/en/books/cll/6/#ex-6-3) exhibits **mi**, a pro-sumti; **lu e'osai li'u**, a quotation; and **le tcidu**, a description.

<span id="ex-6-4"></span><span id="example-random-id-0YaH"></span>
> **ti mitre li ci**
> _This measures-in-meters the-number three._
> _This is three meters long._

[Example 6.4](/en/books/cll/6/#ex-6-4) exhibits **ti**, a pro-sumti; and **li ci**, a number.

Most of this chapter is about descriptions, as they have the most complicated syntax and usage. Some attention is also given to names, which are closely interwoven with descriptions. Pro-sumti, numbers, and quotations are described in more detail in [Ch. 7](/en/books/cll/7/#ch-7), [Ch. 18](/en/books/cll/18/#ch-18), and [Ch. 19](/en/books/cll/19/#ch-19) respectively, so this chapter only gives summaries of their forms and uses. See [Sec. 6.13](/en/books/cll/6/#sec-6-13) through [Sec. 6.15](/en/books/cll/6/#sec-6-15) for these summaries.

<span id="sec-6-2"></span><span id="section-basic-descriptors"></span>
### The three basic description types

The following cmavo are discussed in this section:

<table>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>**le**</td>
<td>`LE`</td>
<td>the, the one(s) described as</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>**lo**</td>
<td>`LE`</td>
<td>some, some of those which really are</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>**la**</td>
<td>`LA`</td>
<td>the one(s) named</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>**ku**</td>
<td>`KU`</td>
<td>elidable terminator for LE, LA</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

The syntax of descriptions is fairly complex, and not all of it can be explained within the confines of this chapter: relative clauses, in particular, are discussed in [Ch. 8](/en/books/cll/8/#ch-8). However, most descriptions have just two components: a descriptor belonging to selma'o LE or LA, and a selbri. (The difference between selma'o LE and selma'o LA is not important until [Sec. 6.12](/en/books/cll/6/#sec-6-12).) Furthermore, the selbri is often just a single brivla. Here is an elementary example:

<span id="ex-6-5"></span><span id="example-random-id-rBuQ"></span>
> **le zarci**
> _one-or-more-specific-things-each-of-which-I-describe-as being-a-market_
> _the market_

The long gloss for **le** is of course far too long to use most of the time, and in fact **le** is quite close in meaning to English _the_. It has particular implications, however, which _the_ does not have.

The general purpose of all descriptors is to create a sumti which might occur in the x₁ place of the selbri belonging to the description. Thus **le zarci** conveys something which might be found in the x₁ place of **zarci**, namely a market.

The specific purpose of **le** is twofold. First, it indicates that the speaker has one or more specific markets in mind (whether or not the listener knows which ones they are). Second, it also indicates that the speaker is merely describing the things he or she has in mind as markets, without being committed to the truth of that description.

<span id="ex-6-6"></span><span id="example-random-id-ULGC"></span>
> **le zarci cu barda**
> _One-or-more-specific-things-which-I-describe-as _markets_ - is/are-big._
> _The market is big._

Note that English-speakers must state whether a reference to markets is to just one (_the market_) or to more than one (_the markets_). Lojban requires no such forced choice, so both colloquial translations of [Example 6.6](/en/books/cll/6/#ex-6-6) are valid. Only the context can specify which is meant. (This rule does not mean that Lojban has no way of specifying the number of markets in such a case: that mechanism is explained in [Sec. 6.7](/en/books/cll/6/#sec-6-7).)

Now consider the following strange-looking example:

<span id="ex-6-7"></span><span id="example-random-id-PutX"></span>
> **le nanmu cu ninmu**
> _One-or-more-specific-things-which-I-describe-as _men_ - is/are-women._
> _The man is a woman._

[Example 6.7](/en/books/cll/6/#ex-6-7) is not self-contradictory in Lojban, because **le nanmu** merely means something or other which, for my present purposes, I choose to describe as a man, whether or not it really is a man. A plausible instance would be: someone we had assumed to be a man at a distance turned out to be actually a woman on closer observation. [Example 6.7](/en/books/cll/6/#ex-6-7) is what I would say to point out my observation to you.

In all descriptions with **le**, the listener is presumed to either know what I have in mind or else not to be concerned at present (perhaps I will give more identifying details later). In particular, I might be pointing at the supposed man or men: [Example 6.7](/en/books/cll/6/#ex-6-7) would then be perfectly intelligible, since **le nanmu** merely clarifies that I am pointing at the supposed man, not at a landscape, or a nose, which happens to lie in the same direction.

The second descriptor dealt with in this section is **lo**. Unlike **le**, **lo** is nonspecific:

<span id="ex-6-8"></span><span id="example-random-id-t11z"></span>
> **lo zarci**
> _one-or-more-of-all-the-things-which-really are-markets_
> _a market_

Again, there are two colloquial English translations. The effect of using **lo** in [Example 6.8](/en/books/cll/6/#ex-6-8) is to refer generally to one or more markets, without being specific about which. Unlike **le zarci**, **lo zarci** must refer to something which actually is a market (that is, which can appear in the x₁ place of a truthful bridi whose selbri is **zarci**). Thus

<span id="ex-6-9"></span><span id="example-random-id-fSxN"></span>
> **lo nanmu cu ninmu**
> _That-which-really-is a-man - is-a-woman._
> _Some man is a woman._

must be false in Lojban, given that there are no objects in the real world which are both men and women. Pointing at some specific men or women would not make [Example 6.9](/en/books/cll/6/#ex-6-9) true, because those specific individuals are no more both-men-and-women than any others. In general, **lo** refers to whatever individuals meet its description.

The last descriptor of this section is **la**, which indicates that the selbri which follows it has been dissociated from its normal meaning and is being used as a name. Like **le** descriptions, **la** descriptions are implicitly restricted to those I have in mind. (Do not confuse this use of **la** with its use before regular Lojbanized names, which is discussed in [Sec. 6.12](/en/books/cll/6/#sec-6-12).) For example:

<span id="ex-6-10"></span><span id="example-random-id-PrGp"></span>
> **la cribe pu finti le lisri**
> _That-named _bear_ [past] creates the story._
> _Bear wrote the story._

In [Example 6.10](/en/books/cll/6/#ex-6-10), **la cribe** refers to someone whose naming predicate is **cribe**, i.e. _Bear_. In English, most names don't mean anything, or at least not anything obvious. The name _Frank_ coincides with the English word _frank_, meaning _honest_, and so one way of translating _Frank ate some cheese_ into Lojban would be:

<span id="ex-6-11"></span><span id="example-random-id-yyBX"></span>
> **la stace pu citka lo cirla**
> _That-named _Honest/Frank_ [past] eats some cheese._

English-speakers typically would not do this, as we tend to be more attached to the sound of our names than their meaning, even if the meaning (etymological or current) is known. Speakers of other languages may feel differently. (In point of fact, _Frank_ originally meant _the free one_ rather than _the honest one_.)

It is important to note the differences between [Example 6.10](/en/books/cll/6/#ex-6-10) and the following:

<span id="ex-6-12"></span><span id="example-random-id-nXyo"></span>
> **le cribe pu finti le lisri**
> _One-or-more-specific-things-which-I-describe-as bears [past] creates the story._
> _The bear(s) wrote the story._

<span id="ex-6-13"></span><span id="example-random-id-93Yv"></span>
> **lo cribe pu finti le lisri**
> _One-or-more-of-the-things-which-really are-bears [past] creates the story._
> _A bear wrote the story._

[Example 6.12](/en/books/cll/6/#ex-6-12) is about a specific bear or bearlike thing(s), or thing(s) which the speaker (perhaps whimsically or metaphorically) describes as a bear (or more than one); [Example 6.13](/en/books/cll/6/#ex-6-13) is about one or more of the really existing, objectively defined bears. In either case, though, each of them must have contributed to the writing of the story, if more than one bear (or _bear_) is meant.

(The notion of a _really existing, objectively defined bear_ raises certain difficulties. Is a panda bear a _real bear_? How about a teddy bear? In general, the answer is _yes_. Lojban gismu are defined as broadly as possible, allowing tanru and lujvo to narrow down the definition. There probably are no necessary and sufficient conditions for defining what is and what is not a bear that can be pinned down with complete precision: the real world is fuzzy. In borderline cases, **le** may communicate better than **lo**.)

So while [Example 6.10](/en/books/cll/6/#ex-6-10) could easily be true (there is a real writer named _Greg Bear_), and [Example 6.12](/en/books/cll/6/#ex-6-12) could be true if the speaker is sufficiently peculiar in what he or she describes as a bear, [Example 6.13](/en/books/cll/6/#ex-6-13) is certainly false.

Similarly, compare the following two examples, which are analogous to [Example 6.12](/en/books/cll/6/#ex-6-12) and [Example 6.13](/en/books/cll/6/#ex-6-13) respectively:

<span id="ex-6-14"></span><span id="example-random-id-qKw7"></span>
> **le remna pu finti le lisri**
> _Those-described-as a-human [past] writes that-described-as a-story._
> _The human being(s) wrote the story._

<span id="ex-6-15"></span><span id="example-random-id-qKYf"></span>
> **lo remna pu finti le lisri**
> _That-which-really-is a-human [past] writes that-described-as a-story._
> _A human being wrote the story._

[Example 6.14](/en/books/cll/6/#ex-6-14) says who the author of the story is: one or more particular human beings that the speaker has in mind. If the topic of conversation is the story, then [Example 6.14](/en/books/cll/6/#ex-6-14) identifies the author as someone who can be pointed out or who has been previously mentioned; whereas if the topic is a person, then **le remna** is in effect a shorthand reference to that person. [Example 6.15](/en/books/cll/6/#ex-6-15) merely says that the author is human.

The elidable terminator for all descriptions is **ku**. It can almost always be omitted with no danger of ambiguity. The main exceptions are in certain uses of relative clauses, which are discussed in [Sec. 8.6](/en/books/cll/8/#sec-8-6), and in the case of a description immediately preceding the selbri. In this latter case, using an explicit **cu** before the selbri makes the **ku** unnecessary. There are also a few other uses of **ku**: in the compound negator **naku** (discussed in [Ch. 16](/en/books/cll/16/#ch-16)) and to terminate place-structure, tense, and modal tags that do not have associated sumti (discussed in [Ch. 9](/en/books/cll/9/#ch-9) and [Ch. 10](/en/books/cll/10/#ch-10)).

<span id="sec-6-3"></span><span id="section-masses"></span>
### Individuals and masses

The following cmavo are discussed in this section:

<table>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>**lei**</td>
<td>`LE`</td>
<td>the mass I describe as</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>**loi**</td>
<td>`LE`</td>
<td>part of the mass of those which really are</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>**lai**</td>
<td>`LA`</td>
<td>the mass of those named</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

All Lojban sumti are classified by whether they refer to one of three types of objects, known as _individuals_, _masses_, and _sets_. The term _individual_ is misleading when used to refer to more than one object, but no less-confusing term has as yet been found. All the descriptions in [Sec. 6.1](/en/books/cll/6/#sec-6-1) and [Sec. 6.2](/en/books/cll/6/#sec-6-2) refer to individuals, whether one or more than one. Consider the following example:

<span id="ex-6-16"></span><span id="example-random-id-mwhq"></span>
> **le prenu cu bevri le pipno**
> _One-or-more-of-those-I-describe-as persons - carry the piano._
> _The person(s) carry the piano._

(Of course the second **le** should really get the same translation as the first, but I am putting the focus of this discussion on the first **le**, the one preceding **prenu**. I will assume that there is only one piano under discussion.)

Suppose the context of [Example 6.16](/en/books/cll/6/#ex-6-16) is such that you can determine that I am talking about three persons. What am I claiming? I am claiming that each of the three persons carried the piano. This claim can be true if the persons carried the piano one at a time, or in turns, or in a variety of other ways. But in order for [Example 6.16](/en/books/cll/6/#ex-6-16) to be true, I must be willing to assert that person 1 carried the piano, and that person 2 carried the piano, and that person 3 carried the piano.

But suppose I am not willing to claim that. For in fact pianos are heavy, and very few persons can carry a piano all by themselves. The most likely factual situation is that person 1 carried one end of the piano, and person 2 the other end, while person 3 either held up the middle or else supervised the whole operation without actually lifting anything. The correct way of expressing such a situation in Lojban is:

<span id="ex-6-17"></span><span id="example-random-id-eCsh"></span>
> **lei prenu cu bevri le pipno**
> _The-mass-of-one-or-more-of-those-I-describe-as persons - carry the piano._
> _The person(s) carry the piano._

Here the same three persons are treated not as individuals, but as a so-called _mass entity_, or just _mass_. A mass has the properties of each individual which composes it, and may have other properties of its own as well. This can lead to apparent contradictions. Thus suppose in the piano-moving example above that person 1 has fair skin, whereas person 2 has dark skin. Then it is correct to say that the person-mass has both fair skin and dark skin. Using the mass descriptor **lei** signals that ordinary logical reasoning is not applicable: contradictions can be maintained, and all sorts of other peculiarities may exist. However, we can safely say that a mass inherits only the component properties that are relevant to it; it would be ludicrous to say that a mass of two persons is of molecular dimensions, simply because some of the parts (namely, the molecules) of the persons are that small.

The descriptors **loi** and **lai** are analogous to **lo** and **la** respectively, but refer to masses either by property (**loi**) or by name (**lai**). A classic example of **loi** use is:

<span id="ex-6-18"></span><span id="example-random-id-T1pF"></span>
> **loi cinfo cu xabju le fi'ortu'a**
> _Part-of-the-mass-of-those-which-really are-lions - dwell-in the African-land._
> _The lion dwells in Africa._

The difference between **lei** and **loi** is that **lei cinfo** refers to a mass of specific individuals which the speaker calls lions, whereas **loi cinfo** refers to some part of the mass of all those individuals which actually are lions. The restriction to _some part of the mass_ allows statements like [Example 6.18](/en/books/cll/6/#ex-6-18) to be true even though some lions do not dwell in Africa – they live in various zoos around the world. On the other hand, [Example 6.18](/en/books/cll/6/#ex-6-18) doesn't actually say that most lions live in Africa: equally true is

<span id="ex-6-19"></span><span id="example-random-id-JzXc"></span>
> **loi glipre**
> _Part-of-the-mass-of-those-which-really are-English-persons_

since there is at least one English person living there. [Sec. 6.4](/en/books/cll/6/#sec-6-4) explains another method of saying what is usually meant by _The lion lives in Africa_ which does imply that living in Africa is normal, not exceptional, for lions.

Note that the Lojban mass articles are sometimes translated by English plurals (the most usual case), sometimes by English singulars (when the singular is used to express typicalness or abstraction), and sometimes by singulars with no article:

<span id="ex-6-20"></span><span id="example-random-id-yDCF"></span>
> **loi matne cu ranti**
> _Part-of-the-mass-of-that-which-really-is a-quantity-of-butter - is-soft._
> _Butter is soft._

Of course, some butter is hard (for example, if it is frozen butter), so the _part-of_ implication of **loi** becomes once again useful. The reason this mechanism works is that the English words like _butter_, which are seen as already describing masses, are translated in Lojban by non-mass forms. The place structure of **matne** is _x₁ is a quantity of butter from source x₂_, so the single English word _butter_ is translated as something like _a part of the mass formed from all the quantities of butter that exist_. (Note that the operation of forming a mass entity does not imply, in Lojban, that the components of the mass are necessarily close to one another or even related in any way other than conceptually. Masses are formed by the speaker's intention to form a mass, and can in principle contain anything.)

The mass name descriptor **lai** is used in circumstances where we wish to talk about a mass of things identified by a name which is common to all of them. It is not used to identify a mass by a single name peculiar to it. Thus the mass version of [Example 6.9](/en/books/cll/6/#ex-6-9),

<span id="ex-6-21"></span><span id="example-random-id-H8z5"></span>
> **lai cribe pu finti le vi cukta**
> _The-mass-of-those-named _bear_ [past] creates the nearby book._
> _The Bears wrote this book._

in a context where **la cribe** would be understood as plural, would mean that either Tom Bear or Fred Bear (to make up some names) might have written the book, or that Tom and Fred might have written it as collaborators. Using **la** instead of **lai** in [Example 6.21](/en/books/cll/6/#ex-6-21) would give the implication that each of Tom and Fred, considered individually, had written it.

<span id="sec-6-4"></span><span id="section-sets"></span>
### Masses and sets

The following cmavo are discussed in this section:

<table>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>**le'i**</td>
<td>`LE`</td>
<td>the set described as</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>**lo'i**</td>
<td>`LE`</td>
<td>the set of those which really are</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>**la'i**</td>
<td>`LA`</td>
<td>the set of those named</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

Having said so much about masses, let us turn to sets. Sets are easier to understand than masses, but are more rarely used. Like a mass, a set is an abstract object formed from a number of individuals; however, the properties of a set are not derived from any of the properties of the individuals that compose it.

Sets have properties like cardinality (how many elements in the set), membership (the relationship between a set and its elements), and set inclusion (the relationship between two sets, one of which – the superset – contains all the elements of the other – the subset). The set descriptors **le'i**, **lo'i** and **la'i** correspond exactly to the mass descriptors **lei**, **loi**, and **lai** except that normally we talk of the whole of a set, not just part of it. Here are some examples contrasting **lo**, **loi**, and **lo'i**:

<span id="ex-6-22"></span><span id="example-random-id-qL1E"></span>
> **lo ratcu cu bunre**
> _One-or-more-of-those-which-really-are rats - are-brown._
> _Some rats are brown._

<span id="ex-6-23"></span><span id="example-random-id-qL2Y"></span>
> **loi ratcu cu cmalu**
> _Part-of-the-mass-of-those-which-really-are rats - are-small._
> _Rats are small._

**lo'i ratcu cu barda** The-set-of rats - is-large. There are a lot of rats.

The mass of rats is small because at least one rat is small; the mass of rats is also large; the set of rats, though, is unquestionably large – it has billions of members. The mass of rats is also brown, since some of its components are; but it would be incorrect to call the set of rats brown – brown-ness is not the sort of property that sets possess.

Lojban speakers should generally think twice before employing the set descriptors. However, certain predicates have places that require set sumti to fill them. For example, the place structure of **fadni** is:

Why is it necessary for the x₃ place of **fadni** to be a set? Because it makes no sense for an individual to be typical of another individual: an individual is typical of a group. In order to make sure that the bridi containing **fadni** is about an entire group, its x₃ place must be filled with a set:

<span id="ex-6-25"></span><span id="example-random-id-xIXo"></span>
> **mi fadni zo'e lo'i lobypli**
> _I am-ordinary in-property--[unspecified] among-the-set-of Lojban-users._
> _I am a typical Lojban user._

Note that the x₂ place has been omitted; I am not specifying in exactly which way I am typical – whether in language knowledge, or age, or interests, or something else. If **lo'i** were changed to **lo** in [Example 6.25](/en/books/cll/6/#ex-6-25), the meaning would be something like _I am typical of some Lojban user_, which is nonsense.

<span id="sec-6-5"></span><span id="section-typicals"></span>
### Descriptors for typical objects

The following cmavo are discussed in this section:

<table>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>**lo'e**</td>
<td>`LE`</td>
<td>the typical</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>**le'e**</td>
<td>`LE`</td>
<td>the stereotypical</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

As promised in [Sec. 6.3](/en/books/cll/6/#sec-6-3), Lojban has a method for discriminating between _the lion_ who lives in Africa and _the Englishman_ who, generally speaking, doesn't live in Africa even though some Englishmen do. The descriptor **lo'e** means _the typical_, as in

<span id="ex-6-26"></span><span id="example-random-id-AJKt"></span>
> **lo'e cinfo cu xabju le fi'ortu'a**
> _The-typical lion - dwells-in the African-land._
> _The lion dwells in Africa._

What is this _typical lion_? Surely it is not any particular lion, because no lion has all of the _typical_ characteristics, and (worse yet) some characteristics that all real lions have can't be viewed as typical. For example, all real lions are either male or female, but it would be bizarre to suppose that the typical lion is either one. So the typical lion has no particular sex, but does have a color (golden brown), a residence (Africa), a diet (game), and so on. Likewise we can say that

<span id="ex-6-27"></span><span id="example-random-id-8PoG"></span>
> **lo'e glipre cu xabju**
> _The-typical English-person - dwells-in_

The relationship between **lo'e cinfo** and **lo'i cinfo** may be explained thus: the typical lion is an imaginary lion-abstraction which best exemplifies members of the set of lions. There is a similar relationship between **le'e** and **le'i**:

<span id="ex-6-28"></span><span id="example-random-id-D88V"></span>
> **le'e xelso merko cu gusta ponse**
> _The-stereotypical Greek-type-of American - is-a-restaurant-type-of owner._
> _Lots of Greek-Americans own restaurants._

Here we are concerned not with the actual set of Greek-Americans, but with the set of those the speaker has in mind, which is typified by one (real or imaginary) who owns a restaurant. The word _stereotypical_ is often derogatory in English, but **le'e** need not be derogatory in Lojban: it simply suggests that the example is typical in the speaker's imagination rather than in some objectively agreed-upon way. Of course, different speakers may disagree about what the features of _the typical lion_ are (some would include having a short intestine, whereas others would know nothing of lions' intestines), so the distinction between **lo'e cinfo** and **le'e cinfo** may be very fine.

Furthermore,

<span id="ex-6-29"></span><span id="example-random-id-NVFy"></span>
> **le'e skina cu se--finti ne'i la xali,uyd.**
> _The-stereotypical movie - is-invented in that-named Hollywood._

is probably true to an American, but might be false (not the stereotype) to someone living in India or Russia.

Note that there is no naming equivalent of **lo'e** and **le'e**, because there is no need, as a rule, for a _typical George_ or a _typical Smith_. People or things who share a common name do not, in general, have any other common attributes worth mentioning.

<span id="sec-6-6"></span><span id="section-quantified-sumti"></span>
### Quantified sumti

The following cmavo are discussed in this section:

<table>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>**ro**</td>
<td>`PA`</td>
<td>all of/each of</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>**su'o**</td>
<td>`PA`</td>
<td>at least (one of)</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

Quantifiers tell us how many: in the case of quantifiers with sumti, how many things we are talking about. In Lojban, quantifiers are expressed by numbers and mathematical expressions: a large topic discussed in some detail in [Ch. 18](/en/books/cll/18/#ch-18). For the purposes of this chapter, a simplified treatment will suffice. Our examples will employ either the simple Lojban numbers **pa**, **re**, **ci**, **vo**, and **mu**, meaning _one_, _two_, _three_, _four_, _five_ respectively, or else one of four special quantifiers, two of which are discussed in this section and listed above. These four quantifiers are important because every Lojban sumti has either one or two of them implicitly present in it – which one or two depends on the particular kind of sumti. There is more explanation of implicit quantifiers later in this section. (The other two quantifiers, **piro** and **pisu'o**, are explained in [Sec. 6.7](/en/books/cll/6/#sec-6-7).)

Every Lojban sumti may optionally be preceded by an explicit quantifier. The purpose of this quantifier is to specify how many of the things referred to by the sumti are being talked about. Here are some simple examples contrasting sumti with and without explicit quantifiers:

<span id="ex-6-30"></span><span id="example-random-id-qL61"></span>
> **do cadzu le bisli**
> _You walk-on the ice._

<span id="ex-6-31"></span><span id="example-random-id-qLAH"></span>
> **re do cadzu le bisli**
> _Two-of you walk-on the ice._

The difference between [Example 6.30](/en/books/cll/6/#ex-6-30) and [Example 6.31](/en/books/cll/6/#ex-6-31) is the presence of the explicit quantifier **re** in the latter example. Although **re** by itself means _two_, when used as a quantifier it means _two-of_. Out of the group of listeners (the number of which isn't stated), two (we are not told which ones) are asserted to be _walkers on the ice_. Implicitly, the others (if any) are not walkers on the ice. In Lojban, you cannot say _I own three shoes_ if in fact you own four shoes. Numbers need never be specified, but if they are specified they must be correct.

(This rule does not mean that there is no way to specify a number which is vague. The sentence

<span id="ex-6-32"></span><span id="example-random-id-gLpy"></span>
> **mi ponse su'o ci cutci**
> _I possess at-least three shoes._

is true if you own three shoes, or four, or indeed any larger number. More details on vague numbers appear in the discussion of mathematical expressions in [Ch. 18](/en/books/cll/18/#ch-18).)

Now consider [Example 6.30](/en/books/cll/6/#ex-6-30) again. How many of the listeners are claimed to walk on the ice? The answer turns out to be: all of them, however many that is. So [Example 6.30](/en/books/cll/6/#ex-6-30) and [Example 6.33](/en/books/cll/6/#ex-6-33):

<span id="ex-6-33"></span><span id="example-random-id-0qr0"></span>
> **ro do cadzu le bisli**
> _All-of you walk-on the ice._

turn out to mean exactly the same thing. This is a safe strategy, because if one of my listeners doesn't turn out to be walking on the ice, I can safely claim that I didn't intend that person to be a listener! And in fact, all of the personal pro-sumti such as **mi** and **mi'o** and **ko** obey the same rule. We say that personal pro-sumti have a so-called _implicit quantifier_ of **ro** (all). This just means that if no quantifier is given explicitly, the meaning is the same as if the implicit quantifier had been used.

Not all sumti have **ro** as the implicit quantifier, however. Consider the quotation in:

<span id="ex-6-34"></span><span id="example-random-id-3eMo"></span>
> **mi cusku lu do cadzu le bisli li'u**
> _I express [quote] you walk-on the ice [unquote]._
> _I say, _You walk on the ice.__

What is the implicit quantifier of the quotation **lu do cadzu le bisli li'u**? Surely not **ro**. If **ro** were supplied explicitly, thus:

<span id="ex-6-35"></span><span id="example-random-id-h4SJ"></span>
> **mi cusku ro lu do cadzu le bisli li'u**
> _I express all-of [quote] you walk-on the ice [unquote]._

the meaning would be something like _I say every occurrence of the sentence 'You walk on the ice'_. Of course I don't say every occurrence of it, only some occurrences. One might suppose that [Example 6.34](/en/books/cll/6/#ex-6-34) means that I express exactly one occurrence, but it is more Lojbanic to leave the number unspecified, as with other sumti. We can say definitely, however, that I say it at least once.

The Lojban cmavo meaning _at least_ is **su'o**, and if no ordinary number follows, **su'o** means _at least once_. (See [Example 6.32](/en/books/cll/6/#ex-6-32) for the use of **su'o** with an ordinary number). Therefore, the explicitly quantified version of [Example 6.34](/en/books/cll/6/#ex-6-34) is

<span id="ex-6-36"></span><span id="example-random-id-P558"></span>
> **mi cusku su'o lu do cadzu le bisli li'u**
> _I express at-least-one-of [quote] you walk-on the ice [unquote]._
> _I say one or more instances of _You walk on the ice_._

If an explicit ordinary number such as **re** were to appear, it would have to convey an exact expression, so

<span id="ex-6-37"></span><span id="example-random-id-59dF"></span>
> **mi cusku re lu do cadzu le bisli li'u**
> _I express two-of [quote] you walk-on the ice [unquote]._

means that I say the sentence exactly twice, neither more nor less.

<span id="sec-6-7"></span><span id="section-quantified-descriptions"></span>
### Quantified descriptions

The following cmavo are discussed in this section:

<table>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>**piro**</td>
<td>`PA`</td>
<td>the whole of</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>**pisu'o**</td>
<td>`PA`</td>
<td>a part of</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

Like other sumti, descriptions can be quantified. When a quantifier appears before a description, it has the same meaning as one appearing before a non-description sumti: it specifies how many things, of all those referred to by the description, are being talked about in this particular bridi. Suppose that context tells us that **le gerku** refers to three dogs. Then we can say that exactly two of them are white as follows:

<span id="ex-6-38"></span><span id="example-random-id-WtUh"></span>
> **re le gerku cu blabi**
> _Two-of the dogs - are-white._
> _Two of the dogs are white._

When discussing descriptions, this ordinary quantifier is called an _outer quantifier_, since it appears outside the description. But there is another possible location for a quantifier: between the descriptor and the selbri. This quantifier is called an _inner quantifier_, and its meaning is quite different: it tells the listener how many objects the description selbri characterizes.

For example, the context of [Example 6.38](/en/books/cll/6/#ex-6-38) supposedly told us that **le gerku** referred to some three specific dogs. This assumption can be made certain with the use of an explicit inner quantifier:

<span id="ex-6-39"></span><span id="example-random-id-X3iY"></span>
> **re le ci gerku cu blabi**
> _Two-of the three dogs - are-white._
> _Two of the three dogs are white._

(As explained in the discussion of [Example 6.32](/en/books/cll/6/#ex-6-32), simple numbers like those in [Example 6.39](/en/books/cll/6/#ex-6-39) must be exact: it therefore follows that the third dog cannot be white.)

You may also specify an explicit inner quantifier and leave the outer quantifier implicit:

<span id="ex-6-40"></span><span id="example-random-id-JxzV"></span>
> **le ci gerku cu blabi**
> _The three dogs - are-white._
> _The three dogs are white._

There are rules for each of the 11 descriptors specifying what the implicit values for the inner and outer quantifiers are. They are meant to provide sensible default values when context is absent, not necessarily to prescribe hard and fast rules. The following table lists the implicit values:

<table>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>le:</td>
<td>ro le su&#x27;o</td>
<td>all of the at-least-one described as</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>lo:</td>
<td>su&#x27;o lo ro</td>
<td>at least one of all of those which really are</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>la:</td>
<td>ro la su&#x27;o</td>
<td>all of the at least one named</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>lei:</td>
<td>pisu&#x27;o lei su&#x27;o</td>
<td>some part of the mass of the at-least-one described as</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>loi:</td>
<td>pisu&#x27;o loi ro</td>
<td>some part of the mass of all those that really are</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>lai:</td>
<td>pisu&#x27;o lai su&#x27;o</td>
<td>some part of the mass of the at-least-one named</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>le&#x27;i:</td>
<td>piro le&#x27;i su&#x27;o</td>
<td>the whole of the set of the at-least-one described as</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>lo&#x27;i:</td>
<td>piro lo&#x27;i ro</td>
<td>the whole of the set of all those that really are</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>la&#x27;i:</td>
<td>piro la&#x27;i su&#x27;o</td>
<td>the whole of the set of the at-least-one named</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>le&#x27;e:</td>
<td>ro le&#x27;e su&#x27;o</td>
<td>all the stereotypes of the at-least-one described as</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>lo&#x27;e:</td>
<td>su&#x27;o lo&#x27;e ro</td>
<td>at least one of the types of all those that really are</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

When examined for the first time, this table looks dreadfully arbitrary. In fact, there are quite a few regularities in it. First of all, the la-series (that is, the descriptors **la**, **lai**, and **la'i**) and the le-series (that is, the descriptors **le**, **lei**, **le'i**, and **le'e**) always have corresponding implicit quantifiers, so we may subsume the la-series under the le-series for the rest of this discussion: _le-series cmavo_ will refer to both the le-series proper and to the la-series.

The rule for the inner quantifier is very simple: the lo-series cmavo (namely, **lo**, **loi**, **lo'i**, and **lo'e**) all have an implicit inner quantifier of **ro**, whereas the le-series cmavo all have an implicit inner quantifier of **su'o**.

Why? Because lo-series descriptors always refer to all of the things which really fit into the x₁ place of the selbri. They are not restricted by the speaker's intention. Descriptors of the le-series, however, are so restricted, and therefore talk about some number, definite or indefinite, of objects the speaker has in mind – but never less than one.

Understanding the implicit outer quantifier requires rules of greater subtlety. In the case of mass and set descriptors, a single rule suffices for each: reference to a mass is implicitly a reference to some part of the mass; reference to a set is implicitly a reference to the whole set. Masses and sets are inherently singular objects: it makes no sense to talk about two distinct masses with the same components, or two distinct sets with the same members. Therefore, the largest possible outer quantifier for either a set description or a mass description is **piro**, the whole of it.

(Pedantically, it is possible that the mass of water molecules composing an ice cube might be thought of as different from the same mass of water molecules in liquid form, in which case we might talk about **re lei djacu**, two masses of the water-bits I have in mind.)

Why _pi-_? It is the Lojban cmavo for the decimal point. Just as **pimu** means _.5_, and when used as a quantifier specifies a portion consisting of five tenths of a thing, **piro** means a portion consisting of the all-ness – the entirety – of a thing. Similarly, **pisu'o** specifies a portion consisting of at least one part of a thing, i.e. some of it.

Smaller quantifiers are possible for sets, and refer to subsets. Thus **pimu le'i nanmu** is a subset of the set of men I have in mind; we don't know precisely which elements make up this subset, but it must have half the size of the full set. This is the best way to say _half of the men_; saying **pimu le nanmu** would give us a half-portion of one of them instead! Of course, the result of **pimu le'i nanmu** is still a set; if you need to refer to the individuals of the subset, you must say so (see **lu'a** in [Sec. 6.10](/en/books/cll/6/#sec-6-10)).

The case of outer quantifiers for individual descriptors (including **le**, **lo**, **la**, and the typical descriptors **le'e** and **lo'e**) is special. When we refer to specific individuals with **le**, we mean to refer to all of those we have in mind, so **ro** is appropriate as the implicit quantifier, just as it is appropriate for **do**. Reference to non-specific individuals with **lo**, however, is typically to only some of the objects which can be correctly described, and so **su'o** is the appropriate implicit quantifier, just as for quotations.

From the English-speaking point of view, the difference in structure between the following example using **le**:

<span id="ex-6-41"></span><span id="example-random-id-f643"></span>
> **[ro] le ci gerku cu blabi**
> _[All-of] those-described-as three dogs - are-white._
> _The three dogs are white._

and the corresponding form with **lo**:

<span id="ex-6-42"></span><span id="example-random-id-gr7Y"></span>
> **ci lo [ro] gerku cu blabi**
> _Three-of those-which-are [all] dogs - are-white._
> _Three dogs are white._

looks very peculiar. Why is the number **ci** found as an inner quantifier in [Example 6.41](/en/books/cll/6/#ex-6-41) and as an outer quantifier in [Example 6.42](/en/books/cll/6/#ex-6-42)? The number of dogs is the same in either case. The answer is that the **ci** in [Example 6.41](/en/books/cll/6/#ex-6-41) is part of the specification: it tells us the actual number of dogs in the group that the speaker has in mind. In [Example 6.42](/en/books/cll/6/#ex-6-42), however, the dogs referred to by **... lo gerku** are all the dogs that exist: the outer quantifier then restricts the number to three; which three, we cannot tell. The implicit quantifiers are chosen to avoid claiming too much or too little: in the case of **le**, the implicit outer quantifier **ro** says that each of the dogs in the restricted group is white; in the case of **lo**, the implicit inner quantifier simply says that three dogs, chosen from the group of all the dogs there are, are white.

Using exact numbers as inner quantifiers in lo-series descriptions is dangerous, because you are stating that exactly that many things exist which really fit the description. So examples like

<span id="ex-6-43"></span><span id="example-random-id-uYH4"></span>
> **[so'o] lo ci gerku cu blabi**
> _[some-of] those-which-really-are three dogs - are-white._

are semantically anomalous; [Example 6.43](/en/books/cll/6/#ex-6-43) claims that some dog (or dogs) is white, but also that there are just three dogs in the universe!

Nevertheless, inner quantifiers are permitted on **lo** descriptors for consistency's sake, and may occasionally be useful.

Note that the inner quantifier of **le**, even when exact, need not be truthful: **le ci nanmu** means _what I describe as three men_, not _three of what I describe as men_. This follows from the rule that what is described by a **le** description represents the speaker's viewpoint rather than the objective way things are.

<span id="sec-6-8"></span><span id="section-indefinite-descriptions"></span>
### Indefinite descriptions

By a quirk of Lojban syntax, it is possible to omit the descriptor **lo**, but never any other descriptor, from a description like that of [Example 6.42](/en/books/cll/6/#ex-6-42); namely, one which has an explicit outer quantifier but no explicit inner quantifier. The following example:

<span id="ex-6-44"></span><span id="example-random-id-EsVd"></span>
> **ci gerku [ku] cu blabi**
> _Three-of-those-which-are dogs - - are-white._
> _Three dogs are white._

is equivalent in meaning to [Example 6.42](/en/books/cll/6/#ex-6-42). Even though the descriptor is not present, the elidable terminator **ku** may still be used. The name _indefinite description_ for this syntactic form is historically based: of course, it is no more and no less indefinite than its counterpart with an explicit **lo**. Indefinite descriptions were introduced into the language in order to imitate the syntax of English and other natural languages.

Indefinite descriptions must fit this mold exactly: there is no way to make one which does not have an explicit outer quantifier (thus ***gerku cu blabi** is ungrammatical), or which has an explicit inner quantifier (thus ***reboi ci gerku cu blabi** is also ungrammatical – **re ci gerku cu blabi** is fine, but means _23 dogs are white_).

Note: [Example 6.32](/en/books/cll/6/#ex-6-32) also contains an indefinite description, namely **su'o ci cutci**; another version of that example using an explicit **lo** would be:

<span id="ex-6-45"></span><span id="example-random-id-SMvA"></span>
> **mi ponse su'o ci lo cutci**
> _I possess at-least three things-which-really-are shoes_
> _I own three (or more) shoes._

<span id="sec-6-9"></span><span id="section-sumti-based-descriptions"></span>
### sumti-based descriptions

As stated in [Sec. 6.2](/en/books/cll/6/#sec-6-2), most descriptions consist of just a descriptor and a selbri. (In this chapter, the selbri have always been single gismu, but of course any selbri, however complex, can be employed in a description. The syntax and semantics of selbri are explained in [Ch. 5](/en/books/cll/5/#ch-5).) In the intervening sections, inner and outer quantifiers have been added to the syntax. Now it is time to discuss a description of a radically different kind: the sumti-based description.

A sumti-based description has a sumti where the selbri would normally be, and the inner quantifier is required – it cannot be implicit. An outer quantifier is permitted but not required.

A full theory of sumti-based descriptions has yet to be worked out. One common case, however, is well understood. Compare the following:

<span id="ex-6-46"></span><span id="example-random-id-qLaQ"></span>
> **re do cu nanmu**
> _Two-of you - are-men._

<span id="ex-6-47"></span><span id="example-random-id-qLAr"></span>
> **le re do cu nanmu**
> _The two-of you - are-men._

[Example 6.46](/en/books/cll/6/#ex-6-46) simply specifies that of the group of listeners, size unknown, two are men. [Example 6.47](/en/books/cll/6/#ex-6-47), which has the sumti-based description **le re do**, says that of the two listeners, all (the implicit outer quantifier **ro**) are men. So in effect the inner quantifier **re** gives the number of individuals which the inner sumti **do** refers to.

Here is another group of examples:

<span id="ex-6-48"></span><span id="example-random-id-qLbf"></span>
> **re le ci cribe cu bunre**
> _Two-of the three bears - are-brown._

<span id="ex-6-49"></span><span id="example-random-id-qLbh"></span>
> **le re le ci cribe cu bunre**
> _The two-of the three bears - are-brown._

<span id="ex-6-50"></span><span id="example-random-id-qLBq"></span>
> **pa le re le ci cribe cu bunre**
> _One-of the two-of the three bears - is-brown._

In each case, **le ci cribe** restricts the bears (or alleged bears) being talked of to some group of three which the speaker has in mind. [Example 6.48](/en/books/cll/6/#ex-6-48) says that two of them (which two is not stated) are brown. [Example 6.49](/en/books/cll/6/#ex-6-49) says that a specific pair of them are brown. [Example 6.50](/en/books/cll/6/#ex-6-50) says that of a specific pair chosen from the original three, one or the other of that pair is brown.

<span id="sec-6-10"></span><span id="section-sumti-qualifiers"></span>
### sumti qualifiers

The following cmavo are discussed in this section:

<table>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>**la'e**</td>
<td>`LAhE`</td>
<td>something referred to by</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>**lu'e**</td>
<td>`LAhE`</td>
<td>a reference to</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>**tu'a**</td>
<td>`LAhE`</td>
<td>an abstraction involving</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>**lu'a**</td>
<td>`LAhE`</td>
<td>an individual/member/component of</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>**lu'i**</td>
<td>`LAhE`</td>
<td>a set formed from</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>**lu'o**</td>
<td>`LAhE`</td>
<td>a mass formed from</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>**vu'i**</td>
<td>`LAhE`</td>
<td>a sequence formed from</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>**na'ebo**</td>
<td>`NAhE+BO`</td>
<td>something other than</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>**to'ebo**</td>
<td>`NAhE+BO`</td>
<td>the opposite of</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>**no'ebo**</td>
<td>`NAhE+BO`</td>
<td>the neutral form of</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>**je'abo**</td>
<td>`NAhE+BO`</td>
<td>that which indeed is</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>**lu'u**</td>
<td>`LUhU`</td>
<td>elidable terminator for LAhE and NAhE+BO</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

Well, that's quite a list of cmavo. What are they all about?

The above cmavo and compound cmavo are called the _sumti qualifiers_. All of them are either single cmavo of selma'o LAhE, or else compound cmavo involving a scalar negation cmavo of selma'o NAhE immediately followed by **bo** of selma'o BO. Syntactically, you can prefix a sumti qualifier to any sumti and produce another simple sumti. (You may need to add the elidable terminator **lu'u** to show where the qualified sumti ends.)

Semantically, sumti qualifiers represent short forms of certain common special cases. Suppose you want to say _I see 'The Red Pony'_, where _The Red Pony_ is the title of a book. How about:

<span id="ex-6-51"></span><span id="example-random-id-6W3v"></span>
> **mi viska lu le xunre cmaxirma li'u**
> _I see [quote] the red small-horse [unquote]._

But [Example 6.51](/en/books/cll/6/#ex-6-51) doesn't work: it says that you see a piece of text _The Red Pony_. That might be all right if you were looking at the cover of the book, where the words _The Red Pony_ are presumably written. (More precisely, where the words **le xunre cmaxirma** are written – but we may suppose the book has been translated into Lojban.)

What you really want to say is:

<span id="ex-6-52"></span><span id="example-random-id-MSVK"></span>
> **mi viska le selsinxa**
> _I see the thing-represented-by_

The x₂ place of **selsinxa** (the x₁ place of **sinxa**) is a sign or symbol, and the x₁ place of **selsinxa** (the x₂ place of **sinxa**) is the thing represented by the sign. [Example 6.52](/en/books/cll/6/#ex-6-52) allows us to use a symbol (namely the title of a book) to represent the thing it is a symbol of (namely the book itself).

This operation turns out to be needed often enough that it's useful to be able to say:

<span id="ex-6-53"></span><span id="example-random-id-Ajty"></span>
> **mi viska la'e lu le xunre cmaxirma li'u [lu'u]**
> _I see the-referent-of [quote] the red small-horse [unquote] -._

So when **la'e** is prefixed to a sumti referring to a symbol, it produces a sumti referring to the referent of that symbol. (In computer jargon, **la'e** dereferences a pointer.)

By introducing a sumti qualifier, we correct a false sentence ([Example 6.51](/en/books/cll/6/#ex-6-51)), which too closely resembles its literal English equivalent, into a true sentence ([Example 6.53](/en/books/cll/6/#ex-6-53)), without having to change it overmuch; in particular, the structure remains the same. Most of the uses of sumti qualifiers are of this general kind.

The sumti qualifier **lu'e** provides the converse operation: it can be prefixed to a sumti referring to some thing to produce a sumti referring to a sign or symbol for the thing. For example,

<span id="ex-6-54"></span><span id="example-random-id-7ytm"></span>
> **mi pu cusku lu'e le vi cukta**
> _I [past] express a-symbol-for the nearby book._
> _I said the title of this book._

The equivalent form not using a sumti qualifier would be:

<span id="ex-6-55"></span><span id="example-random-id-aC9Q"></span>
> **mi pu cusku le sinxa be le vi cukta**
> _I [past] express the symbol-for - the nearby book._

which is equivalent to [Example 6.54](/en/books/cll/6/#ex-6-54), but longer.

The other sumti qualifiers follow the same rules. The cmavo **tu'a** is used in forming abstractions, and is explained more fully in [Sec. 11.11](/en/books/cll/11/#sec-11-11). The triplet **lu'a**, **lu'i**, and **lu'o** convert between individuals, sets, and masses; **vu'i** belongs to this group as well, but creates a sequence, which is similar to a set but has a definite order. (The set of John and Charles is the same as the set of Charles and John, but the sequences are different.) Here are some examples:

<span id="ex-6-56"></span><span id="example-random-id-ioCu"></span>
> **mi troci tu'a le vorme**
> _I try some-abstraction-about the door._
> _I try (to open) the door._

[Example 6.56](/en/books/cll/6/#ex-6-56) might mean that I try to do something else involving the door; the form is deliberately vague.

Most of the following examples make use of the cmavo **ri**, belonging to selma'o KOhA. This cmavo means _the thing last mentioned_; it is equivalent to repeating the immediately previous sumti (but in its original context). It is explained in more detail in [Sec. 7.6](/en/books/cll/7/#sec-7-6).

<span id="ex-6-57"></span><span id="example-random-id-qLbv"></span>
> **lo'i ratcu cu barda**
> _The-set-of rats - is-large._

<span id="ex-6-58"></span><span id="example-random-id-qLCP"></span>
> **lo ratcu cu cmalu .iku'i lu'i ri barda**
> _Some rats - are-small. But the-set-of them-last-mentioned is-large._
> _Some rats are small, but the set of rats is large._

<span id="ex-6-59"></span><span id="example-random-id-qLcy"></span>
> **mi ce do girzu**
> _I in-a-set-with you are-a-set._

(Yes, I know these examples are a bit silly. This set was introduced for completeness, and practical examples are as yet hard to come by.)

Finally, the four sumti qualifiers formed from a cmavo of NAhE and **bo** are all concerned with negation, which is discussed in detail in [Ch. 15](/en/books/cll/15/#ch-15). Here are a few examples of negation sumti qualifiers:

**mi viska na'ebo le gerku** I see something-other-than the dog.

This compound, **na'ebo**, is the most common of the four negation sumti qualifiers. The others usually only make sense in the context of repeating, with modifications, something already referred to:

<span id="ex-6-61"></span><span id="example-random-id-JwCb"></span>
> **mi nelci loi glare cidja**
> _I like part-of-the-mass-of hot-type-of food._

(In [Example 6.61](/en/books/cll/6/#ex-6-61), the sumti **ra** refers to some previously mentioned sumti other than that referred to by **ri**. We cannot use **ri** here, because it would signify **la djein.**, that being the most recent sumti available to **ri**. See more detailed explanations in [Sec. 7.6](/en/books/cll/7/#sec-7-6).)

<span id="sec-6-11"></span><span id="section-vocative-syntax"></span>
### The syntax of vocative phrases

Vocative phrases are not sumti, but are explained in this chapter because their syntax is very similar to that of sumti. Grammatically, a vocative phrase is one of the so-called _free modifiers_ of Lojban, along with subscripts, parentheses, and various other constructs explained in [Ch. 19](/en/books/cll/19/#ch-19). They can be placed after many, but not all, constructions of the grammar: in general, after any elidable terminator (which, however, must not then be elided!), at the beginnings and ends of sentences, and in many other places.

The purpose of a vocative phrase is to indicate who is being addressed, or to indicate to that person that he or she ought to be listening. A vocative phrase begins with a cmavo of selma'o COI or DOI, all of which are explained in more detail in [Sec. 13.14](/en/books/cll/13/#sec-13-14). Sometimes that is all there is to the phrase:

<span id="ex-6-62"></span><span id="example-random-id-qLE3"></span>
> **coi**
> _[greetings]_
> _Hello._

<span id="ex-6-63"></span><span id="example-random-id-qLeB"></span>
> **je'e**
> _[acknowledgement]_
> _Uh-huh._

In these cases, the person being addressed is obvious from the context. However, a vocative word (more precisely, one or more cmavo of COI, possibly followed by **doi**, or else just **doi** by itself) can be followed by one of several kinds of phrases, all of which are intended to indicate the addressee. The most common case is a name:

<span id="ex-6-64"></span><span id="example-random-id-Bega"></span>
> **coi. djan.**
> _[greetings] John._
> _Hello, John._

A pause is required (for morphological reasons) between a member of COI and a name. You can use **doi** instead of a pause:

<span id="ex-6-65"></span><span id="example-random-id-QmzB"></span>
> **coi doi djan.**
> _[greetings] O John._
> _Hello, John._

means exactly the same thing and does not require a pause. Using **doi** by itself is like just saying someone's name to attract his or her attention:

<span id="ex-6-66"></span><span id="example-random-id-ULHn"></span>
> **doi djan.**
> _O John._
> _John!_

In place of a name, a description may appear, lacking its descriptor, which is understood to be **le**:

<span id="ex-6-67"></span><span id="example-random-id-V530"></span>
> **coi xunre pastu nixli**
> _Hello, (red-type-of dress)-type-of girl._
> _Hello, girl with the red dress!_

The listener need not really be a **xunre pastu nixli**, as long as she understands herself correctly from the description. (Actually, only a bare selbri can appear; explicit quantifiers are forbidden in this form of vocative, so the implicit quantifiers **su'o le ro** are in effect.)

Finally, a complete sumti may be used, the most general case.

<span id="ex-6-68"></span><span id="example-random-id-tBTa"></span>
> **co'o la bab. .e la noras.**
> _[partings] that-named Bob and that-named Nora._
> _Goodbye, Bob and Nora._

[Example 6.67](/en/books/cll/6/#ex-6-67) is thus the same as:

<span id="ex-6-69"></span><span id="example-random-id-3Qac"></span>
> **coi le xunre pastu nixli**
> _Hello, the-one-described-as (red-type-of dress)-type-of girl!_

and [Example 6.66](/en/books/cll/6/#ex-6-66) is the same as:

<span id="ex-6-70"></span><span id="example-random-id-bx2C"></span>
> **doi la djan.**
> _O that-named John!_

Finally, the elidable terminator for vocative phrases is **do'u** (of selma'o DOhU), which is rarely needed except when a simple vocative word is being placed somewhere within a bridi. It may also be required when a vocative is placed between a sumti and its relative clause, or when there are a sequence of so-called _free modifiers_ (vocatives, subscripts, utterance ordinals – see [Ch. 18](/en/books/cll/18/#ch-18) – metalinguistic comments – see [Sec. 19.12](/en/books/cll/19/#sec-19-12) – or reciprocals – see [Ch. 19](/en/books/cll/19/#ch-19)) which must be properly separated.

The meaning of a vocative phrase that is within a sentence is not affected by its position in the sentence: thus [Example 6.70](/en/books/cll/6/#ex-6-70) and [Example 6.71](/en/books/cll/6/#ex-6-71) mean the same thing:

<span id="ex-6-71"></span><span id="example-random-id-qLFi"></span>
> **doi djan. ko klama mi**
> _O John you--[imperative] go-to me._
> _John, come to me!_

<span id="ex-6-72"></span><span id="example-random-id-qLGC"></span>
> **ko klama mi doi djan.**
> _You--[imperative] go-to me O John._
> _Come to me, John!_

As usual for this chapter, the full syntax of vocative phrases has not been explained: relative clauses, discussed in [Ch. 8](/en/books/cll/8/#ch-8), make for more possibilities.

<span id="sec-6-12"></span><span id="section-names"></span>
### Lojban names

Names have been used freely as sumti throughout this chapter without too much explanation. The time for the explanation has now come.

First of all, there are two different kinds of things usually called _names_ when talking about Lojban. The naming predicates of [Sec. 6.2](/en/books/cll/6/#sec-6-2) are just ordinary predicates which are being used in a special sense. In addition, though, there is a class of Lojban words which are used only to name things: these can be recognized by the fact that they end in a consonant followed by a pause. Some examples:

<span id="ex-6-73"></span><span id="example-random-id-u0zY"></span>
> **djan. meris. djein. .alis.**
> _John. Mary. Jane. Alice._

(Note that **.alis.** begins as well as ends with a pause, because all Lojban words beginning with a vowel must be preceded by a pause. See [Ch. 4](/en/books/cll/4/#ch-4) for more information.)

Names of this kind have two basic uses in Lojban: when used in a vocative phrase (see [Sec. 6.11](/en/books/cll/6/#sec-6-11)) they indicate who the listener is or should be. When used with a descriptor of selma'o LA, namely **la**, **lai**, or **la'i**, they form sumti which refer to the persons or things known by the name.

<span id="ex-6-74"></span><span id="example-random-id-qLgw"></span>
> **la djonz. klama le zarci**
> _Those-named Jones go-to the store._
> _The Joneses go to-the store._

<span id="ex-6-75"></span><span id="example-random-id-qLHn"></span>
> **lai djonz. klama le zarci**
> _The-mass-of-those-named Jones goes-to the store._
> _The Joneses go to the store._

In [Example 6.74](/en/books/cll/6/#ex-6-74), the significance is that all the persons (perhaps only one) I mean to refer to by the name **djonz.** are going to the store. In [Example 6.75](/en/books/cll/6/#ex-6-75), the Joneses are massified, and only some part of them needs to be going. Of course, by **djonz.** I can mean whomever I want: that person need not use the name **djonz.** at all.

The sumti in [Example 6.74](/en/books/cll/6/#ex-6-74) and [Example 6.75](/en/books/cll/6/#ex-6-75) operate exactly like the similar uses of **la** and **lai** in [Example 6.10](/en/books/cll/6/#ex-6-10) and [Example 6.21](/en/books/cll/6/#ex-6-21) respectively. The only difference is that these descriptors are followed by Lojban name-words. And in fact, the only difference between descriptors of selma'o LA (these three) and of selma'o LE (all the other descriptors) is that the former can be followed by name-words, whereas the latter cannot.

There are certain limitations on the form of name-words in Lojban. In particular, they cannot contain the letter-sequences (or sound-sequences) **la**, **lai**, or **doi** unless a consonant immediately precedes within the name. Reciprocally, every name not preceded by **la**, **lai**, **la'i**, or **doi** must be preceded by a pause instead:

<span id="ex-6-76"></span><span id="example-random-id-qLiB"></span>
> **coi .djan.**
> _[greetings] John._
> _Hello, John._

<span id="ex-6-77"></span><span id="example-random-id-qLIJ"></span>
> **zo .djan. cmene mi**
> _The-word _John_ is-the-name-of me._
> _My name is John._

In [Example 6.76](/en/books/cll/6/#ex-6-76) and [Example 6.77](/en/books/cll/6/#ex-6-77), **.djan.** appears with a pause before it as well as after it, because the preceding word is not one of the four special cases. These rules force names to always be separable from the general word-stream.

Unless some other rule prevents it (such as the rule that **zo** is always followed by a single word, which is quoted), multiple names may appear wherever one name is permitted, each with its terminating pause:

<span id="ex-6-78"></span><span id="example-random-id-cw3p"></span>
> **doi djan.--pol.--djonz. le bloti cu klama fi--la niuport.--niuz.**
> _O John--Paul--Jones the boat - goes from-that-named Newport--News._
> _John Paul Jones, the boat comes (to somewhere) from Newport News._

A name may not contain any consonant combination that is illegal in Lojban words generally: the _impermissible consonant clusters_ of Lojban morphology (explained in [Sec. 3.6](/en/books/cll/3/#sec-3-6)). Thus **djeimz.** is not a valid version of _James_ (because mz is invalid): **djeimyz** will suffice. Similarly, **la** may be replaced by **ly**, **lai** by **ly'i**, **doi** by **do'i** or **dai**. Here are a few examples:

Doyle ***doi,l** **do'il** or **dai,l** Lyra ***lairas** **ly'iras** Lottie ***latis** **LYtis.** or **lotis.** (American pronunciation)

Names may be borrowed from other languages or created arbitrarily. Another common practice is to use one or more rafsi, arranged to end with a consonant, to form a name: thus the rafsi loj- for **logji** (logical) and ban- for **bangu** (language) unite to form the name of this language:

<span id="ex-6-80"></span><span id="example-random-id-uXAY"></span>
> **lojban.**
> _Lojban_

When borrowing names from another language which end in a vowel, or when turning a Lojban brivla (all of which end in vowels) into a name, the vowel may be removed or an arbitrary consonant added. It is common (but not required) to use the consonants s or n when borrowing vowel-final names from English; speakers of other languages may wish to use other consonant endings.

The implicit quantifier for name sumti of the form **la** followed by a name is **su'o**, just as for **la** followed by a selbri.

<span id="sec-6-13"></span><span id="section-pro-sumti"></span>
### Pro-sumti summary

The Lojban pro-sumti are the cmavo of selma'o KOhA. They fall into several classes: personal, definable, quantificational, reflexive, back-counting, indefinite, demonstrative, metalinguistic, relative, question. More details are given in [Ch. 7](/en/books/cll/7/#ch-7); this section mostly duplicates information found there, but adds material on the implicit quantifier of each pro-sumti.

The following examples illustrate each of the classes. Unless otherwise noted below, the implicit quantification for pro-sumti is **ro** (all). In the case of pro-sumti which refer to other sumti, the **ro** signifies _all of those referred to by the other sumti_: thus it is possible to restrict, but not to extend, the quantification of the other sumti.

Personal pro-sumti (**mi**, **do**, **mi'o**, **mi'a**, **ma'a**, **do'o**, **ko**) refer to the speaker or the listener or both, with or without third parties:

<span id="ex-6-81"></span><span id="example-random-id-PHPi"></span>
> **mi prami do**
> _I love you._

The personal pro-sumti may be interpreted in context as either representing individuals or masses, so the implicit quantifier may be **pisu'o** rather than **ro**: in particular, **mi'o**, **mi'a**, **ma'a**, and **do'o** specifically represent mass combinations of the individuals (you and I, I and others, you and I and others, you and others) that make them up.

Definable pro-sumti (**ko'a**, **ko'e**, **ko'i**, **ko'o**, **ko'u**, **fo'a**, **fo'e**, **fo'i**, **fo'o**, **fo'u**) refer to whatever the speaker has explicitly made them refer to. This reference is accomplished with **goi** (of selma'o GOI), which means _defined-as_.

<span id="ex-6-82"></span><span id="example-random-id-8whK"></span>
> **le cribe goi ko'a cu xekri .i ko'a citka le smacu**
> _The bear defined-as it-1 - is-black. - It-1 eats the mouse._

Quantificational pro-sumti (**da**, **de**, **di**) are used as variables in bridi involving predicate logic:

<span id="ex-6-83"></span><span id="example-random-id-FVj8"></span>
> **ro da poi prenu**
> _All somethings-1 which are-persons_

(This is not the same as _All persons love a certain fish_; the difference between the two is one of quantifier order.) The implicit quantification rules for quantificational pro-sumti are particular to them, and are discussed in detail in [Ch. 16](/en/books/cll/16/#ch-16). Roughly speaking, the quantifier is **su'o** (at least one) when the pro-sumti is first used, and **ro** (all) thereafter.

Reflexive pro-sumti (**vo'a**, **vo'e**, **vo'i**, **vo'o**, **vo'u**) refer to the same referents as sumti filling other places in the same bridi, with the effect that the same thing is referred to twice:

<span id="ex-6-84"></span><span id="example-random-id-nMse"></span>
> **le cribe cu batci vo'a**
> _The bear - bites what-is-in-the-x1-place._
> _The bear bites itself._

Back-counting pro-sumti (**ri**, **ra**, **ru**) refer to the referents of previous sumti counted backwards from the pro-sumti:

<span id="ex-6-85"></span><span id="example-random-id-cjTj"></span>
> **mi klama la frankfurt. ri**
> _I go-to that-named Frankfurt from-the-referent-of-the-last-sumti_
> _I go from Frankfurt to Frankfurt (by some unstated route)._

Indefinite pro-sumti (**zo'e**, **zu'i**, **zi'o**) refer to something which is unspecified:

<span id="ex-6-86"></span><span id="example-random-id-d5Ee"></span>
> **mi klama la frankfurt.**
> _I go-to that-named Frankfurt_

The implicit quantifier for indefinite pro-sumti is, well, indefinite. It might be **ro** (all) or **su'o** (at least one) or conceivably even **no** (none), though **no** would require a very odd context indeed.

Demonstrative pro-sumti (**ti**, **ta**, **tu**) refer to things pointed at by the speaker, or when pointing is not possible, to things near or far from the speaker:

<span id="ex-6-87"></span><span id="example-random-id-aqfJ"></span>
> **ko muvgau**
> _You--[imperative] move_

Metalinguistic pro-sumti (**di'u**, **de'u**, **da'u**, **di'e**, **de'e**, **da'e**, **dei**, **do'i**) refer to spoken or written utterances, either preceding, following, or the same as the current utterance.

<span id="ex-6-88"></span><span id="example-random-id-8VYF"></span>
> **li re su'i re du li vo**
> _The-number two plus two equals the-number four._

The implicit quantifier for metalinguistic pro-sumti is **su'o** (at least one), because they are considered analogous to **lo** descriptions: they refer to things which really are previous, current, or following utterances.

The relative pro-sumti (**ke'a**) is used within relative clauses (see [Ch. 8](/en/books/cll/8/#ch-8) for a discussion of relative clauses) to refer to whatever sumti the relative clause is attached to.

<span id="ex-6-89"></span><span id="example-random-id-sf2T"></span>
> **mi viska le mlatu ku poi zo'e**
> _I see the cat(s) - such-that something-unspecified_

The question pro-sumti (**ma**) is used to ask questions which request the listener to supply a sumti which will make the question into a truth:

<span id="ex-6-90"></span><span id="example-random-id-9tSb"></span>
> **do klama ma**
> _You go-to what-sumti?_
> _Where are you going?_

The implicit quantifier for the question pro-sumti is **su'o** (at least one), because the listener is only being asked to supply a single answer, not all correct answers.

In addition, sequences of lerfu words (of selma'o BY and related selma'o) can also be used as definable pro-sumti.

<span id="sec-6-14"></span><span id="section-quotation"></span>
### Quotation summary

There are four kinds of quotation in Lojban: text quotation, words quotation, single-word quotation, non-Lojban quotation. More information is provided in [Ch. 19](/en/books/cll/19/#ch-19).

Text quotations are preceded by **lu** and followed by **li'u**, and are an essential part of the surrounding text: they must be grammatical Lojban texts.

<span id="ex-6-91"></span><span id="example-random-id-v1DE"></span>
> **mi cusku lu mi'e .djan. li'u**
> _I say the-text--[quote] I-am John [unquote]._
> _I say _I'm John_._

Words quotations are quotations of one or more Lojban words. The words need not mean anything, but they must be morphologically valid so that the end of the quotation can be discerned.

<span id="ex-6-92"></span><span id="example-random-id-UMDQ"></span>
> **mi cusku lo'u li--mi le'u**
> _I say the-words--[quote] **li mi** [unquote]._
> _I say _li mi_._

Note that the translation of [Example 6.92](/en/books/cll/6/#ex-6-92) does not translate the Lojban words, because they are not presumed to have any meaning (in fact, they are ungrammatical).

Single-word quotation quotes a single Lojban word. Compound cmavo are not allowed.

<span id="ex-6-93"></span><span id="example-random-id-XqKv"></span>
> **mi cusku zo .ai**
> _I say the-word **.ai**._

Non-Lojban quotation can quote anything, Lojban or not, even non-speech such as drum talk, whistle words, music, or belching. A Lojban word which does not appear within the quotation is used before and after it to set it off from the surrounding Lojban text.

<span id="ex-6-94"></span><span id="example-random-id-1Uey"></span>
> **mi cusku zoi .kuot. I'm--John .kuot.**
> _I express [non-Lojban] < I'm--John >._
> _I say _I'm John_._

The implicit quantifier for all types of quotation is **su'o** (at least one), because quotations are analogous to **lo** descriptions: they refer to things which actually are words or sequences of words.

<span id="sec-6-15"></span><span id="section-number-summary"></span>
### Number summary

The sumti which refer to numbers consist of the cmavo **li** (of selma'o LI) followed by an arbitrary Lojban mekso, or mathematical expression. This can be anything from a simple number up to the most complicated combination of numbers, variables, operators, and so on. Much more information on numbers is given in [Ch. 18](/en/books/cll/18/#ch-18). Here are a few examples of increasing complexity:

<span id="ex-6-95"></span><span id="example-random-id-qLIm"></span>
> **li vo**
> _the-number four_

<span id="ex-6-96"></span><span id="example-random-id-qLis"></span>
> **li re su'i re**
> _the-number two plus two_

<span id="ex-6-97"></span><span id="example-random-id-qLiX"></span>
> **li .abu bi'epi'i xy. bi'ete'a re su'i by. bi'epi'i xy. su'i cy.**
> _the-number a times x to-power 2 plus b times x plus c_

An alternative to **li** is **me'o**, also of selma'o LI. Number expressions beginning with **me'o** refer to the actual expression, rather than its value. Thus [Example 6.95](/en/books/cll/6/#ex-6-95) and [Example 6.96](/en/books/cll/6/#ex-6-96) above have the same meaning, the number four, whereas

<span id="ex-6-98"></span><span id="example-random-id-sW7u"></span>
> **me'o vo**
> _the-expression four_
> __4__

and

<span id="ex-6-99"></span><span id="example-random-id-3s82"></span>
> **me'o re su'i re**
> _the-expression two plus two_
> __2+2__

refer to different pieces of text.

The implicit quantifier for numbers and mathematical expressions is **su'o**, because these sumti are analogous to **lo** descriptions: they refer to things which actually are numbers or pieces of text. In the case of numbers (with **li**), this is a distinction without a difference, as there is only one number which is 4; but there are many texts _4_, as many as there are documents in which that numeral appears.
