## Chapter 8. Relative Clauses, Which Make sumti Even More Complicated

<span id="ch-8"></span><span id="chapter-relative-clauses"></span><span id="chapter-relative-clauses-picture"></span>
_Source: converted from DocBook XML in `archive/cll/chapters/`. Lojban in **bold**, English glosses and emphasis in _italics_ (site conventions)._

<!-- figure: media/chapter-relative-clauses.gif -->

<span id="sec-8-1"></span><span id="section-poi"></span>
### What are you pointing at?

The following cmavo are discussed in this section:

<table>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>**poi**</td>
<td>`NOI`</td>
<td>restrictive relative clause introducer</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>**ke'a**</td>
<td>`GOhA`</td>
<td>relative pro-sumti</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>**ku'o**</td>
<td>`KUhO`</td>
<td>relative clause terminator</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

Let us think about the problem of communicating what it is that we are pointing at when we are pointing at something. In Lojban, we can refer to what we are pointing at by using the pro-sumti **ti** if it is nearby, or **ta** if it is somewhat further away, or **tu** if it is distant. (Pro-sumti are explained in full in [Ch. 7](/en/books/cll/7/#ch-7).)

However, even with the assistance of a pointing finger, or pointing lips, or whatever may be appropriate in the local culture, it is often hard for a listener to tell just what is being pointed at. Suppose one is pointing at a person (in particular, in the direction of his or her face), and says:

<span id="ex-8-1"></span><span id="example-random-id-QzhK"></span>
> **ti cu barda**
> _This-one -- is-big._

What is the referent of **ti**? Is it the person? Or perhaps it is the person's nose? Or even (for **ti** can be plural as well as singular, and mean _these ones_ as well as _this one_) the pores on the person's nose?

To help solve this problem, Lojban uses a construction called a _relative clause_. Relative clauses are usually attached to the end of sumti, but there are other places where they can go as well, as explained later in this chapter. A relative clause begins with a word of selma'o NOI, and ends with the elidable terminator **ku'o** (of selma'o KUhO). As you might suppose, **noi** is a cmavo of selma'o NOI; however, first we will discuss the cmavo **poi**, which also belongs to selma'o NOI.

In between the **poi** and the **ku'o** appears a full bridi, with the same syntax as any other bridi. Anywhere within the bridi of a relative clause, the pro-sumti **ke'a** (of selma'o KOhA) may be used, and it stands for the sumti to which the relative clause is attached (called the _relativized sumti_). Here are some examples before we go any further:

<span id="ex-8-2"></span><span id="example-random-id-qLt8"></span>
> **ti poi ke'a prenu ku'o cu barda**
> _This-thing such-that-( IT is-a-person ) -- is-large._
> _This thing which is a person is big._

<span id="ex-8-3"></span><span id="example-random-id-qLtX"></span>
> **ti poi ke'a nazbi ku'o cu barda**
> _This-thing such-that-( IT is-a-nose ) -- is-large._
> _This thing which is a nose is big._

<span id="ex-8-4"></span><span id="example-random-id-qLuj"></span>
> **ti poi ke'a nazbi -- kapkevna ku'o cu barda**
> _This-thing such-that-( IT is-a-nose type-of skin-hole ) -- is-big._
> _These things which are nose-pores are big._

In the literal translations throughout this chapter, the word _IT_, capitalized, is used to represent the cmavo **ke'a**. In each case, it serves to represent the sumti (in [8.2](/en/books/cll/8/#ex-8-2) through [8.4](/en/books/cll/8/#ex-8-4), the cmavo **ti**) to which the relative clause is attached.

Of course, there is no reason why **ke'a** needs to appear in the x1 place of a relative clause bridi; it can appear in any place, or indeed even in a sub-bridi within the relative clause bridi. Here are two more examples:

<span id="ex-8-5"></span><span id="example-random-id-qLUV"></span>
> **tu poi le mlatu pu lacpu ke'a ku'o cu ratcu**
> _That-distant-thing such-that-( the cat [past] drags IT ) -- is-a-rat._
> _That thing which the cat dragged is a rat._

<span id="ex-8-6"></span><span id="example-random-id-qLxF"></span>
> **ta poi mi djica le nu**
> _That-thing such-that-( I desire the event-of(_

In [8.6](/en/books/cll/8/#ex-8-6), **ke'a** appears in an abstraction clause (abstractions are explained in [Ch. 11](/en/books/cll/11/#ch-11)) within a relative clause.

Like any sumti, **ke'a** can be omitted. The usual presumption in that case is that it then falls into the x1 place:

<span id="ex-8-7"></span><span id="example-random-id-sMHH"></span>
> **ti poi nazbi cu barda**
> _This-thing which is-a-nose -- is-big._

almost certainly means the same thing as [8.3](/en/books/cll/8/#ex-8-3). However, **ke'a** can be omitted if it is clear to the listener that it belongs in some place other than x1:

<span id="ex-8-8"></span><span id="example-random-id-cUsJ"></span>
> **tu poi le mlatu pu lacpu cu ratcu**
> _That-distant-thing which the cat [past] drags -- is-a-rat_

is equivalent to [8.4](/en/books/cll/8/#ex-8-4).

As stated before, **ku'o** is an elidable terminator, and in fact it is almost always elidable. Throughout the rest of this chapter, **ku'o** will not be written in any of the examples unless it is absolutely required: thus, [8.2](/en/books/cll/8/#ex-8-2) can be written:

<span id="ex-8-9"></span><span id="example-random-id-MtNs"></span>
> **ti poi prenu cu barda**
> _That which is-a-person -- is-big._
> _That person is big._

without any change in meaning. Note that **poi** is translated _which_ rather than _such-that_ when **ke'a** has been omitted from the x1 place of the relative clause bridi. The word _which_ is used in English to introduce English relative clauses: other words that can be used are _who_ and _that_, as in:

<span id="ex-8-10"></span><span id="example-random-id-j5ym"></span>
> _I saw a man who was going to the store._

and

<span id="ex-8-11"></span><span id="example-random-id-J9yC"></span>
> _The building that the school was located in is large._

In [8.10](/en/books/cll/8/#ex-8-10) the relative clause is _who was going to the store_, and in [8.11](/en/books/cll/8/#ex-8-11) it is _that the school was located in_. Sometimes _who_, _which_, and _that_ are used in literal translations in this chapter in order to make them read more smoothly.

<span id="sec-8-2"></span><span id="section-noi"></span>
### Incidental relative clauses

The following cmavo is discussed in this section:

<table>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>**noi**</td>
<td>`NOI`</td>
<td>incidental relative clause introducer</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

There are two basic kinds of relative clauses: restrictive relative clauses introduced by **poi**, and incidental (sometimes called simply _non-restrictive_) relative clauses introduced by **noi**. The difference between restrictive and incidental relative clauses is that restrictive clauses provide information that is essential to identifying the referent of the sumti to which they are attached, whereas incidental relative clauses provide additional information which is helpful to the listener but is not essential for identifying the referent of the sumti. All of the examples in [Sec. 8.1](/en/books/cll/8/#sec-8-1) are restrictive relative clauses: the information in the relative clause is essential to identification. (The title of this chapter, though, uses an incidental relative clause.)

Consider the following examples:

<span id="ex-8-12"></span><span id="example-random-id-qLXK"></span>
> **le gerku poi blanu cu barda**
> _The dog which is-blue -- is-large._
> _The dog which is blue is large._

<span id="ex-8-13"></span><span id="example-random-id-qLys"></span>
> **le gerku noi blanu cu barda**
> _The dog incidentally-which is-blue -- is-large._
> _The dog, which is blue, is large._

In [8.12](/en/books/cll/8/#ex-8-12), the information conveyed by **poi blanu** is essential to identifying the dog in question: it restricts the possible referents from dogs in general to dogs that are blue. This is why **poi** relative clauses are called restrictive. In [8.13](/en/books/cll/8/#ex-8-13), on the other hand, the dog which is referred to has presumably already been identified clearly, and the relative clause **noi blanu** just provides additional information about it. (If in fact the dog hasn't been identified clearly, then the relative clause does not help identify it further.)

In English, the distinction between restrictive and incidental relative clauses is expressed in writing by surrounding incidental, but not restrictive, clauses with commas. These commas are functioning as parentheses, because incidental relative clauses are essentially parenthetical. This distinction in punctuation is represented in speech by a difference in tone of voice. In addition, English restrictive relative clauses can be introduced by _that_ as well as _which_ and _who_, whereas incidental relative clauses cannot begin with _that_. Lojban, however, always uses the cmavo **poi** and **noi** rather than punctuation or intonation to make the distinction.

Here are more examples of incidental relative clauses:

<span id="ex-8-14"></span><span id="example-random-id-WxJo"></span>
> **mi noi pajni cu zvati**
> _I who-incidentally am-a-judge -- am-at [some-place]._
> _I, a judge, am present._

In this example, **mi** is already sufficiently restricted, and the additional information that I am a judge is being provided solely for the listener's edification.

<span id="ex-8-15"></span><span id="example-random-id-pR53"></span>
> **xu do viska le mi karce noi blabi**
> _[True?] You see -- my car incidentally-which is-white._
> _Do you see my car, which is white?_

In [8.15](/en/books/cll/8/#ex-8-15), the speaker is presumed to have only one car, and is providing incidental information that it is white. (Alternatively, he or she might have more than one car, since **le karce** can be plural, in which case the incidental information is that each of them is white.) Contrast [8.16](/en/books/cll/8/#ex-8-16) with a restrictive relative clause:

<span id="ex-8-16"></span><span id="example-random-id-0qU1"></span>
> **xu do viska le mi karce poi blabi**
> _[True?] You see -- my car which is-white._
> _Do you see my car that is white?_

Here the speaker probably has several cars, and is restricting the referent of the sumti **le mi karce** (and thereby the listener's attention) to the white one only. [8.16](/en/books/cll/8/#ex-8-16) means much the same as [8.17](/en/books/cll/8/#ex-8-17), which does not use a relative clause:

<span id="ex-8-17"></span><span id="example-random-id-zsQ6"></span>
> **xu do viska le mi blabi karce**
> _[True?] You see -- my white car._
> _Do you see my car, the white one?_

So a restrictive relative clause attached to a description can often mean the same as a description involving a tanru. However, **blabi karce**, like all tanru, is somewhat vague: in principle, it might refer to a car which carries white things, or even express some more complicated concept involving whiteness and car-ness; the restrictive relative clause of [8.16](/en/books/cll/8/#ex-8-16) can only refer to a car which is white, not to any more complex or extended concept.

<span id="sec-8-3"></span><span id="section-relative-phrases"></span>
### Relative phrases

The following cmavo are discussed in this section:

<table>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>**pe**</td>
<td>`GOI`</td>
<td>restrictive association</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>**po**</td>
<td>`GOI`</td>
<td>restrictive possession</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>**po'e**</td>
<td>`GOI`</td>
<td>restrictive intrinsic possession</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>**po'u**</td>
<td>`GOI`</td>
<td>restrictive identification</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>**ne**</td>
<td>`GOI`</td>
<td>incidental association</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>**no'u**</td>
<td>`GOI`</td>
<td>incidental identification</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>**ge'u**</td>
<td>`GEhU`</td>
<td>relative phrase terminator</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

There are types of relative clauses (those which have a certain selbri) which are frequently wanted in Lojban, and can be expressed using a shortcut called a relative phrase. Relative phrases are introduced by cmavo of selma'o GOI, and consist of a GOI cmavo followed by a single sumti.

Here is an example of **pe**, plus an equivalent sentence using a relative clause:

<span id="ex-8-18"></span><span id="example-random-id-qM04"></span>
> **le stizu pe mi cu blanu**
> _The chair associated-with me -- is-blue._
> _My chair is blue._

<span id="ex-8-19"></span><span id="example-random-id-qM1W"></span>
> **le stizu poi ke'a srana mi cu blanu**
> _The chair such-that-( IT is-associated-with me ) is-blue._

In [8.18](/en/books/cll/8/#ex-8-18) and [8.19](/en/books/cll/8/#ex-8-19), the link between the chair and the speaker is of the loosest kind.

Here is an example of **po**:

<span id="ex-8-20"></span><span id="example-random-id-qM3D"></span>
> **le stizu po mi cu xunre**
> _The chair specific-to me -- is-red._

<span id="ex-8-21"></span><span id="example-random-id-qm3I"></span>
> **le stizu poi ke'a se--steci srana mi cu xunre**
> _The chair such-that-( IT is-specifically associated-with me ) is-red._

[8.20](/en/books/cll/8/#ex-8-20) and [8.21](/en/books/cll/8/#ex-8-21) contrast with [8.18](/en/books/cll/8/#ex-8-18) and [8.19](/en/books/cll/8/#ex-8-19): the chair is more permanently connected with the speaker. A plausible (though not the only possible) contrast between [8.18](/en/books/cll/8/#ex-8-18) and [8.20](/en/books/cll/8/#ex-8-20) is that **pe mi** would be appropriate for a chair the speaker is currently sitting on (whether or not the speaker owned that chair), and **po mi** for a chair owned by the speaker (whether or not he or she was currently occupying it).

As a result, the relationship expressed between two sumti by **po** is usually called _possession_, although it does not necessarily imply ownership, legal or otherwise. The central concept is that of specificity (**steci** in Lojban).

Here is an example of **po'e**, as well as another example of **po**:

<span id="ex-8-22"></span><span id="example-random-id-qM3Q"></span>
> **le birka po'e mi cu spofu**
> _The arm intrinsically-possessed-by me -- is-broken_

<span id="ex-8-23"></span><span id="example-random-id-qm5E"></span>
> **le birka poi jinzi ke se--steci**
> _The arm which is-intrinsically ( specifically_

<span id="ex-8-24"></span><span id="example-random-id-qm7W"></span>
> **le botpi po mi cu spofu**
> _The bottle specific-to me -- is-broken_

[8.22](/en/books/cll/8/#ex-8-22) and [8.23](/en/books/cll/8/#ex-8-23) on the one hand, and [8.24](/en/books/cll/8/#ex-8-24) on the other, illustrate the contrast between two types of possession called _intrinsic_ and _extrinsic_, or sometimes _inalienable_ and _alienable_, respectively. Something is intrinsically (or inalienably) possessed by someone if the possession is part of the possessor, and cannot be changed without changing the possessor. In the case of [8.22](/en/books/cll/8/#ex-8-22), people are usually taken to intrinsically possess their arms: even if an arm is cut off, it remains the arm of that person. (If the arm is transplanted to another person, however, it becomes intrinsically possessed by the new user, though, so intrinsic possession is a matter of degree.)

By contrast, the bottle of [8.24](/en/books/cll/8/#ex-8-24) can be given away, or thrown away, or lost, or stolen, so it is possessed extrinsically (alienably). The exact line between intrinsic and extrinsic possession is culturally dependent. The U.S. Declaration of Independence speaks of the _inalienable rights_ of men, but just what those rights are, and even whether the concept makes sense at all, varies from culture to culture.

Note that [8.22](/en/books/cll/8/#ex-8-22) can also be expressed without a relative clause:

<span id="ex-8-25"></span><span id="example-random-id-bF0U"></span>
> **le birka be mi cu spofu**
> _The arm of-body me -- is-broken_

reflecting the fact that the gismu **birka** has an x2 place representing the body to which the arm belongs. Many, but not all, cases of intrinsic possession can be thus covered without using **po'e** by placing the possessor into the appropriate place of the description selbri.

Here is an example of **po'u**:

<span id="ex-8-26"></span><span id="example-random-id-qM8u"></span>
> **le gerku po'u le mi pendo cu cinba mi**
> _The dog which-is -- my friend -- kisses me._

<span id="ex-8-27"></span><span id="example-random-id-qm90"></span>
> **le gerku poi du le mi pendo cu cinba mi**
> _The dog which = -- my friend -- kisses me._

The cmavo **po'u** does not represent possession at all, but rather identity. (Note that it means **poi du** and its form was chosen to suggest the relationship.)

In [8.26](/en/books/cll/8/#ex-8-26), the use of **po'u** tells us that **le gerku** and **le mi pendo** represent the same thing. Consider the contrast between [8.26](/en/books/cll/8/#ex-8-26) and:

<span id="ex-8-28"></span><span id="example-random-id-wARJ"></span>
> **le mi pendo po'u le gerku cu cinba mi**
> _-- My friend which-is the dog -- kisses me._

The facts of the case are the same, but the listener's knowledge about the situation may not be. In [8.26](/en/books/cll/8/#ex-8-26), the listener is presumed not to understand which dog is meant by **le gerku**, so the speaker adds a relative phrase clarifying that it is the particular dog which is the speaker's friend.

[8.28](/en/books/cll/8/#ex-8-28), however, assumes that the listener does not know which of the speaker's friends is referred to, and specifies that it is the friend that is the dog (which dog is taken to be obvious). Here is another example of the same contrast:

<span id="ex-8-29"></span><span id="example-random-id-qMAd"></span>
> **le tcadu po'u la--nu,iork**
> _The city of New--York [not another city]_

<span id="ex-8-30"></span><span id="example-random-id-qmaY"></span>
> **la--nu,iork po'u le tcadu**
> _New--York -- the city (not the state or some other New York)_

The principle that the possessor and the possessed may change places applies to all the GOI cmavo, and allows for the possibility of odd effects:

<span id="ex-8-31"></span><span id="example-random-id-qMb2"></span>
> **le kabri pe le mi pendo cu cmalu**
> _The cup associated-with -- my friend -- is-small._
> _My friend's cup is small_

<span id="ex-8-32"></span><span id="example-random-id-qmbn"></span>
> **le mi pendo pe le kabri cu cmalu**
> _-- My friend associated-with the cup -- is-small._
> _My friend, the one with the cup, is small._

[8.31](/en/books/cll/8/#ex-8-31) is useful in a context which is about my friend, and states that his or her cup is small, whereas [8.32](/en/books/cll/8/#ex-8-32) is useful in a context that is primarily about a certain cup, and makes a claim about _my friend of the cup_, as opposed to some other friend of mine. Here the cup appears to _possess_ the person! English can't even express this relationship with a possessive – _the cup's friend of mine_ looks like nonsense – but Lojban has no trouble doing so.

Finally, the cmavo **ne** and **no'u** stand to **pe** and **po'u**, respectively, as **noi** does to **poi-** they provide incidental information:

<span id="ex-8-33"></span><span id="example-random-id-Arj8"></span>
> **le blabi gerku ne mi cu batci do**
> _The white dog, incidentally-associated-with me , bites you._
> _The white dog, which is mine, bites you._

In [8.33](/en/books/cll/8/#ex-8-33), the white dog is already fully identified (after all, presumably the listener knows which dog bit him or her!). The fact that it is yours is merely incidental to the main bridi claim.

Distinguishing between **po'u** and **no'u** can be a little tricky. Consider a room with several men in it, one of whom is named Jim. If you don't know their names, I might say:

<span id="ex-8-34"></span><span id="example-random-id-DSf4"></span>
> **le nanmu no'u la djim. cu terpemci**
> _The man, incidentally-who-is that-named Jim , is-a-poet._
> _The man, Jim, is a poet._

Here I am saying that one of the men is a poet, and incidentally telling you that he is Jim. But if you do know the names, then

<span id="ex-8-35"></span><span id="example-random-id-y8nH"></span>
> **le nanmu po'u la djim. cu terpemci**
> _The man who-is that-named Jim -- is-a-poet._
> _The man Jim is a poet._

is appropriate. Now I am using the fact that the man I am speaking of is Jim in order to pick out which man I mean.

It is worth mentioning that English sometimes over-specifies possession from the Lojban point of view (and the point of view of many other languages, including ones closely related to English). The idiomatic English sentence

<span id="ex-8-36"></span><span id="example-random-id-GXyS"></span>
> _The man put his hands in his pockets._

seems strange to a French- or German-speaking person: whose pockets would he put his hands into? and even odder, whose hands would he put into his pockets? In Lojban, the sentence

<span id="ex-8-37"></span><span id="example-random-id-V4R1"></span>
> **le nanmu cu punji le xance -- le daski**
> _The man -- puts the hand at-locus the pocket._

is very natural. Of course, if the man is in fact putting his hands into another's pockets, or another's hands into his pockets, the fact can be specified.

Finally, the elidable terminator for GOI cmavo is **ge'u** of selma'o GEhU; it is almost never required. However, if a logical connective immediately follows a sumti modified by a relative phrase, then an explicit **ge'u** is needed to allow the connective to affect the relativized sumti rather than the sumti of the relative phrase. (What about the cmavo after which selma'o GOI is named? It is discussed in [Sec. 7.5](/en/books/cll/7/#sec-7-5), as it is not semantically akin to the other kinds of relative phrases, although the syntax is the same.)

<span id="sec-8-4"></span><span id="section-zihe"></span>
### Multiple relative clauses: zi'e

<table>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>**zi'e**</td>
<td>`ZIhE`</td>
<td>relative clause joiner</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

Sometimes it is necessary or useful to attach more than one relative clause to a sumti. This is made possible in Lojban by the cmavo **zi'e** (of selma'o ZIhE), which is used to join one or more relative clauses together into a single unit, thus making them apply to the same sumti. For example:

<span id="ex-8-38"></span><span id="example-random-id-HBMR"></span>
> **le gerku poi blabi zi'e poi batci le nanmu cu klama**
> _The dog which is white and which bites the man goes._

The most usual translation of **zi'e** in English is _and_, but **zi'e** is not really a logical connective: unlike most of the true logical connectives (which are explained in [Ch. 14](/en/books/cll/14/#ch-14)), it cannot be converted into a logical connection between sentences.

It is perfectly correct to use **zi'e** to connect relative clauses of different kinds:

<span id="ex-8-39"></span><span id="example-random-id-Vbm7"></span>
> **le gerku poi blabi zi'e noi**
> _The dog that-is (white) and incidentally-such-that_

In [8.39](/en/books/cll/8/#ex-8-39), the restrictive clause **poi blabi** specifies which dog is referred to, but the incidental clause **noi le mi pendo cu ponse** is mere incidental information: the listener is supposed to already have identified the dog from the **poi blabi**. Of course, the meaning (though not necessarily the emphasis) is the same if the incidental clause appears first.

It is also possible to connect relative phrases with **zi'e**, or a relative phrase with a relative clause:

<span id="ex-8-40"></span><span id="example-random-id-36tm"></span>
> **le botpi po mi zi'e poi blanu cu spofu**
> _The bottle specific-to me and which-is blue -- is-broken._
> _My blue bottle is broken._

Note that if the colloquial translation of [8.40](/en/books/cll/8/#ex-8-40) were _My bottle, which is blue, is broken_, then **noi** rather than **poi** would have been correct in the Lojban version, since that version of the English implies that you do not need to know the bottle is blue. As written, [8.40](/en/books/cll/8/#ex-8-40) suggests that I probably have more than one bottle, and the one in question needs to be picked out as the blue one.

<span id="ex-8-41"></span><span id="example-random-id-FapT"></span>
> **mi ba zutse le stizu pe**
> _I [future] sit-in the chair associated-with_

[8.41](/en/books/cll/8/#ex-8-41) illustrates that more than two relative phrases or clauses can be connected with **zi'e**. It almost defies colloquial translation because of the very un-English contrast between **pe mi**, implying that the chair is temporarily connected with me, and **po do**, implying that the chair has a more permanent association with you. (Perhaps I am a guest in your house, in which case the chair would naturally be your property.)

Here is another example, mixing a relative phrase and two relative clauses, a restrictive one and a non-restrictive one:

<span id="ex-8-42"></span><span id="example-random-id-erma"></span>
> **mi ba citka le dembi pe mi zi'e poi cpana**
> _I [future] eat the beans associated-with me and which are-upon_

<span id="sec-8-5"></span><span id="section-voi"></span>
### Non-veridical relative clauses: voi

<table>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>**voi**</td>
<td>`NOI`</td>
<td>non-veridical relative clause introducer</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

There is another member of selma'o NOI which serves to introduce a third kind of relative clause: **voi**. Relative clauses introduced by **voi** are restrictive, like those introduced by **poi**. However, there is a fundamental difference between **poi** and **voi** relative clauses. A **poi** relative clause is said to be veridical, in the same sense that a description using **lo** or **loi** is: it is essential to the interpretation that the bridi actually be true. For example:

<span id="ex-8-43"></span><span id="example-random-id-pcvP"></span>
> **le gerku poi blabi cu klama**
> _The dog which is-white -- goes._

it must actually be true that the dog is white, or the sentence constitutes a miscommunication. If there is a white dog and a brown dog, and the speaker uses **le gerku poi blabi** to refer to the brown dog, then the listener will not understand correctly. However,

<span id="ex-8-44"></span><span id="example-random-id-BDgn"></span>
> **le gerku voi blabi cu klama**
> _The dog which-I-describe-as white -- goes._

puts the listener on notice that the dog in question may not actually meet objective standards (whatever they are) for being white: only the speaker can say exactly what is meant by the term. In this way, **voi** is like **le**; the speaker's intention determines the meaning.

As a result, the following two sentences

<span id="ex-8-45"></span><span id="example-random-id-qMCc"></span>
> **le nanmu cu ninmu**
> _That-which-I-describe-as a-man -- is-a-woman._
> _The _guy_ is actually a gal._

<span id="ex-8-46"></span><span id="example-random-id-qmcE"></span>
> **ti voi nanmu cu ninmu**
> _This-thing which-I-describe-as a-man -- is-a-woman._

mean essentially the same thing (except that [8.46](/en/books/cll/8/#ex-8-46) involves pointing thanks to the use of **ti**, whereas [8.45](/en/books/cll/8/#ex-8-45) doesn't), and neither one is self-contradictory: it is perfectly all right to describe something as a man (although perhaps confusing to the listener) even if it actually is a woman.

<span id="sec-8-6"></span><span id="section-descriptors"></span>
### Relative clauses and descriptors

So far, this chapter has described the various kinds of relative clauses (including relative phrases). The list is now complete, and the rest of the chapter will be concerned with the syntax of sumti that include relative clauses. So far, all relative clauses have appeared directly after the sumti to which they are attached. This is the most common position (and originally the only one), but a variety of other placements are also possible which produce a variety of semantic effects.

There are actually three places where a relative clause can be attached to a description sumti: after the descriptor (**le**, **lo**, or whatever), after the embedded selbri but before the elidable terminator (which is **ku**), and after the **ku**. The relative clauses attached to descriptors that we have seen have occupied the second position. Thus [8.43](/en/books/cll/8/#ex-8-43), if written out with all elidable terminators, would appear as:

<span id="ex-8-47"></span><span id="example-random-id-UmLX"></span>
> **le gerku poi blabi ku'o ku cu klama vau**
> _The (dog which (is-white ) ) -- goes ._
> _The dog which is white is going._

Here **ku'o** is the terminator paired with **poi** and **ku** with **le**, and **vau** is the terminator of the whole bridi.

When a simple descriptor using **le**, like **le gerku**, has a relative clause attached, it is purely a matter of style and emphasis where the relative clause should go. Therefore, the following examples are all equivalent in meaning to [8.47](/en/books/cll/8/#ex-8-47):

<span id="ex-8-48"></span><span id="example-random-id-qmCQ"></span>
> **le poi blabi ku'o gerku cu klama**
> _The such-that-( it-is-white ) dog -- goes._

<span id="ex-8-49"></span><span id="example-random-id-qMct"></span>
> **le gerku ku poi blabi cu klama**
> _The (dog ) which is-white -- goes._

[8.47](/en/books/cll/8/#ex-8-47) will seem most natural to speakers of languages like English, which always puts relative clauses after the noun phrases they are attached to; [8.48](/en/books/cll/8/#ex-8-48), on the other hand, may seem more natural to Finnish or Chinese speakers, who put the relative clause first. Note that in [8.48](/en/books/cll/8/#ex-8-48), the elidable terminator **ku'o** must appear, or the selbri of the relative clause (**blabi**) will merge with the selbri of the description (**gerku**), resulting in an ungrammatical sentence. The purpose of the form appearing in [8.49](/en/books/cll/8/#ex-8-49) will be apparent shortly.

As is explained in detail in [Sec. 6.7](/en/books/cll/6/#sec-6-7), two different numbers (known as the _inner quantifier_ and the _outer quantifier_) can be attached to a description. The inner quantifier specifies how many things the descriptor refers to: it appears between the descriptor and the description selbri. The outer quantifier appears before the descriptor, and specifies how many of the things referred to by the descriptor are involved in this particular bridi. In the following example,

<span id="ex-8-50"></span><span id="example-random-id-3nJN"></span>
> **re -- le mu prenu cu klama le zarci**
> _Two of the five persons -- go-to the market._
> _Two of the five people [that I have in mind] are going to the market._

**mu** is the inner quantifier and **re** is the outer quantifier. Now what is meant by attaching a relative clause to the sumti **re le mu prenu**? Suppose the relative clause is **poi ninmu** (meaning _who are women_). Now the three possible attachment points discussed previously take on significance.

<span id="ex-8-51"></span><span id="example-random-id-qMdb"></span>
> **re -- le poi ninmu ku'o**
> _Two of the such-that([they] are-women )_

<span id="ex-8-52"></span><span id="example-random-id-qmDo"></span>
> **re -- le mu prenu poi ninmu [ku] cu klama le zarci**
> _Two of the (five persons which-( are-women) ) -- go-to the market._
> _Two of the five women go to the market._

<span id="ex-8-53"></span><span id="example-random-id-qMDQ"></span>
> **re -- le mu prenu ku poi ninmu cu klama le zarci**
> _(Two of the five persons ) which-( are-women ) go-to the market._
> _Two women out of the five persons go to the market._

As the parentheses show, [8.52](/en/books/cll/8/#ex-8-52) means that all five of the persons are women, whereas [8.53](/en/books/cll/8/#ex-8-53) means that the two who are going to the market are women. How do we remember which is which? If the relative clause comes after the explicit **ku**, as in [8.53](/en/books/cll/8/#ex-8-53), then the sumti as a whole is qualified by the relative clause. If there is no **ku**, or if the relative clause comes before an explicit **ku**, then the relative clause is understood to apply to everything which the underlying selbri applies to.

What about [8.51](/en/books/cll/8/#ex-8-51)? By convention, it means the same as [8.53](/en/books/cll/8/#ex-8-53), and it requires no **ku**, but it does typically require a **ku'o** instead. Note that the relative clause comes before the inner quantifier.

When **le** is the descriptor being used, and the sumti has no explicit outer quantifier, then the outer quantifier is understood to be **ro** (meaning _all_), as is explained in [Sec. 6.7](/en/books/cll/6/#sec-6-7). Thus **le gerku** is taken to mean _all of the things I refer to as dogs_, possibly all one of them. In that case, there is no difference between a relative clause after the **ku** or before it. However, if the descriptor is **lo**, the difference is quite important:

<span id="ex-8-54"></span><span id="example-random-id-qmDS"></span>
> **lo prenu ku noi blabi cu klama le zarci**
> _(Some persons ) incidentally-which-( are-white ) go-to the market._
> _Some people, who are white, go to the market._

<span id="ex-8-55"></span><span id="example-random-id-qmdX"></span>
> **lo prenu noi blabi [ku] cu klama le zarci**
> _Some (persons incidentally-which are-white ) -- go to-the market._
> _Some of the people, who by the way are white, go to the market._

Both [8.54](/en/books/cll/8/#ex-8-54) and [8.55](/en/books/cll/8/#ex-8-55) tell us that one or more persons are going to the market. However, they make very different incidental claims. Now, what does **lo prenu noi blabi** mean? Well, the default inner quantifier is **ro** (meaning _all_), and the default outer quantifier is **su'o** (meaning _at least one_). Therefore, we must first take all persons, then choose at least one of them. That one or more people will be going.

In [8.54](/en/books/cll/8/#ex-8-54), the relative clause described the sumti once the outer quantifier was applied: one or more people, who are white, are going. But in [8.55](/en/books/cll/8/#ex-8-55), the relative clause actually describes the sumti before the outer quantification is applied, so that it ends up meaning _First take all persons – by the way, they're all white_. But not all people are white, so the incidental claim being made here is false.

The safe strategy, therefore, is to always use **ku** when attaching a **noi** relative clause to a **lo** descriptor. Otherwise we may end up claiming far too much.

When the descriptor is **la**, indicating that what follows is a selbri used for naming, then the positioning of relative clauses has a different significance. A relative clause inside the **ku**, whether before or after the selbri, is reckoned part of the name; a relative clause outside the **ku** is not. Therefore,

<span id="ex-8-56"></span><span id="example-random-id-JYj4"></span>
> **mi viska la nanmu poi terpa le ke'a xirma [ku]**
> _I see that-named-( man which fears the of-IT horse )._
> _I see Man Afraid Of His Horse._

says that the speaker sees a person with a particular name, who does not necessarily fear any horses, whereas

<span id="ex-8-57"></span><span id="example-random-id-9GWR"></span>
> **mi viska la nanmu ku poi terpa le ke'a xirma.**
> _I see that-named-( Man ) which fears the of-IT horse._
> _I see the person named _Man_ who is afraid of his horse._

refers to one (or more) of those named _Man_, namely the one(s) who are afraid of their horses.

Finally, so-called indefinite sumti like **re karce**, which means almost the same as **re lo karce** (which in turn means the same as **re lo ro karce**), can have relative clauses attached; these are taken to be of the outside-the- **ku** variety. Here is an example:

<span id="ex-8-58"></span><span id="example-random-id-J11I"></span>
> **mi ponse re karce [ku] poi xekri**
> _I possess two cars -- which-are black._

The restrictive relative clause only affects the two cars being affected by the main bridi, not all cars that exist. It is ungrammatical to try to place a relative clause within an indefinite sumti (that is, before an explicitly expressed terminating **ku**.) Use an explicit **lo** instead.

<span id="sec-8-7"></span><span id="section-possessive-sumti"></span>
### Possessive sumti

In [8.15](/en/books/cll/8/#ex-8-15) through [8.17](/en/books/cll/8/#ex-8-17), the sumti **le mi karce** appears, glossed as _my car_. Although it might not seem so, this sumti actually contains a relative phrase. When a sumti appears between a descriptor and its description selbri, it is actually a **pe** relative phrase. So

<span id="ex-8-59"></span><span id="example-random-id-pALv"></span>
> **le mi karce cu xunre**
> _-- My car -- is-red._

and

<span id="ex-8-60"></span><span id="example-random-id-1ng6"></span>
> **le pe mi karce cu xunre**
> _The (associated-with me) car -- is-red._

mean exactly the same thing. Furthermore, since there are no special considerations of quantifiers here,

<span id="ex-8-61"></span><span id="example-random-id-BCqF"></span>
> **le karce pe mi cu xunre**
> _The car associated-with me -- is-red._

means the same thing as well. A sumti like the one in [8.59](/en/books/cll/8/#ex-8-59) is called a _possessive sumti_. Of course, it does not really indicate possession in the sense of ownership, but like **pe** relative phrases, indicates only weak association; you can say **le mi karce** even if you've only borrowed it for the night. (In English, _my car_ usually means **le karce po mi**, but we do not have the same sense of possession in _my seat on the bus_; Lojban simply makes the weaker sense the standard one.) The inner sumti, **mi** in [8.59](/en/books/cll/8/#ex-8-59), is correspondingly called the _possessor sumti_.

Historically, possessive sumti existed before any other kind of relative phrase or clause, and were retained when the machinery of relative phrases and clauses as detailed in this chapter so far was slowly built up. When preposed relative clauses of the [8.60](/en/books/cll/8/#ex-8-60) type were devised, possessive sumti were most easily viewed as a special case of them.

Although any sumti, however complex, can appear in a full-fledged relative phrase, only simple sumti can appear as possessor sumti, without a **pe**. Roughly speaking, the legal possessor sumti are: pro-sumti, quotations, names and descriptions, and numbers. In addition, the possessor sumti may not be preceded by a quantifier, as such a form would be interpreted as the unusual _descriptor + quantifier + sumti_ type of description. All these sumti forms are explained in full in [Ch. 6](/en/books/cll/6/#ch-6).

Here is an example of a description used in a possessive sumti:

<span id="ex-8-62"></span><span id="example-random-id-rBmw"></span>
> **le -- le nanmu ku karce cu blanu**
> _The (associated-with the man ) car -- is-blue._
> _The man's car is blue._

Note the explicit **ku** at the end of the possessor sumti, which prevents the selbri of the possessor sumti from merging with the selbri of the main description sumti. Because of the need for this **ku**, the most common kind of possessor sumti are pro-sumti, especially personal pro-sumti, which require no elidable terminator. Descriptions are more likely to be attached with relative phrases.

And here is a number used as a possessor sumti:

<span id="ex-8-63"></span><span id="example-random-id-pYfN"></span>
> **le li mu jdice se--bende**
> _The of-the-number five judging team-member_
> _Juror number 5_

which is not quite the same as _the fifth juror_; it simply indicates a weak association between the particular juror and the number 5.

A possessive sumti may also have regular relative clauses attached to it. This would need no comment if it were not for the following special rule: a relative clause immediately following the possessor sumti is understood to affect the possessor sumti, not the possessive. For example:

<span id="ex-8-64"></span><span id="example-random-id-cVjs"></span>
> **le mi noi sipna vau karce cu na klama**
> _The of-me incidentally-which-( is-sleeping ) car -- isn't going._

means that my car isn't going; the incidental claim of **noi sipna** applies to me, not my car, however. If I wanted to say that the car is sleeping (whatever that might mean) I would need:

<span id="ex-8-65"></span><span id="example-random-id-iP4q"></span>
> **le mi karce poi sipna cu na klama**
> _The of-me car which sleeps -- isn't going._

Note that [8.64](/en/books/cll/8/#ex-8-64) uses **vau** rather than **ku'o** at the end of the relative clause: this terminator ends every simple bridi and is almost always elidable; in this case, though, it is a syllable shorter than the equally valid alternative, **ku'o**.

<span id="sec-8-8"></span><span id="section-vuho"></span>
### Relative clauses and complex sumti: vu'o

The following cmavo is discussed in this section:

<table>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>**vu'o**</td>
<td>`VUhO`</td>
<td>relative clause attacher</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

Normally, relative clauses attach only to simple sumti or parts of sumti: pro-sumti, names and descriptions, pure numbers, and quotations. An example of a relative clause attached to a pure number is:

<span id="ex-8-66"></span><span id="example-random-id-sfHA"></span>
> **li pai noi na'e frinu namcu**
> _The-number pi, incidentally-which is-a-non- fraction number_
> _The irrational number pi_

And here is an incidental relative clause attached to a quotation:

<span id="ex-8-67"></span><span id="example-random-id-WuBh"></span>
> **lu mi klama le zarci li'u**
> _[quote] I go-to the market [unquote]_

which may serve to identify the author of the quotation or some other relevant, but subsidiary, fact about it. All such relative clauses appear only after the simple sumti, never before it.

In addition, sumti with attached sumti qualifiers of selma'o LAhE or NAhE+BO (which are explained in detail in [Sec. 6.10](/en/books/cll/6/#sec-6-10)) can have a relative clause appearing after the qualifier and before the qualified sumti, as in:

<span id="ex-8-68"></span><span id="example-random-id-4sqi"></span>
> **la'e poi tolcitno vau lu le xunre**
> _A-referent-of (which is-old ) [quote] The Red_

[8.68](/en/books/cll/8/#ex-8-68) is a bit complex, and may need some picking apart. The quotation **lu le xunre cmaxirma li'u** means the string of words _The Red Pony_. If the **la'e** at the beginning of the sentence were omitted, [8.68](/en/books/cll/8/#ex-8-68) would claim that a certain string of words is in a room distant from the speaker. But obviously a string of words can't be in a room! The effect of the **la'e** is to modify the sumti so that it refers not to the words themselves, but to the referent of those words, a novel by John Steinbeck (presumably in Lojban translation). The particular copy of _The Red Pony_ is identified by the restrictive relative clause. [8.68](/en/books/cll/8/#ex-8-68) means exactly the same as:

<span id="ex-8-69"></span><span id="example-random-id-yX24"></span>
> **la'e lu le xunre cmaxirma li'u lu'u**
> _A-referent-of ([quote] The Red Small-horse [unquote] )_

and the two sentences can be considered stylistic variants. Note the required **lu'u** terminator, which prevents the relative clause from attaching to the quotation itself: we do not wish to refer to an old quotation!

Sometimes, however, it is important to make a relative clause apply to the whole of a more complex sumti, one which involves logical or non-logical connection (explained in [Ch. 14](/en/books/cll/14/#ch-14)). For example,

<span id="ex-8-70"></span><span id="example-random-id-EYgE"></span>
> **la frank. .e la djordj. noi**
> _That-named Frank and that-named George incidentally-who_

The incidental claim in [8.70](/en/books/cll/8/#ex-8-70) is not that Frank and George are men, but only that George is a man, because the incidental relative clause attaches only to **la djordj**, the immediately preceding simple sumti.

To make a relative clause attach to both parts of the logically connected sumti in [8.70](/en/books/cll/8/#ex-8-70), a new cmavo is needed, **vu'o** (of selma'o VUhO). It is placed between the sumti and the relative clause, and extends the sphere of influence of that relative clause to the entire preceding sumti, including however many logical or non-logical connectives there may be.

<span id="ex-8-71"></span><span id="example-random-id-9XPz"></span>
> **la frank. .e la djordj. vu'o**
> _(That-named Frank and that-named George )_

The presence of **vu'o** here means that the relative clause **noi nanmu** extends to the entire logically connected sumti **la frank. .e la djordj.**; in other words, both Frank and George are claimed to be men, as the colloquial translation shows.

English is able to resolve the distinction correctly in the case of [8.70](/en/books/cll/8/#ex-8-70) and [8.71](/en/books/cll/8/#ex-8-71) by making use of number: _who is_ rather than _who are_. Lojban doesn't distinguish between singular and plural verbs: **nanmu** can mean _is a man_ or _are men_, so another means is required. Furthermore, Lojban's mechanism works correctly in general: if **nanmu** (meaning _is-a-man_) were replaced with **pu bajra** (_ran_), English would have to make the distinction some other way:

<span id="ex-8-72"></span><span id="example-random-id-qmeb"></span>
> **la frank. .e la djordj. noi**
> _That-named Frank and (that-named George who_

<span id="ex-8-73"></span><span id="example-random-id-qmEt"></span>
> **la frank. .e la djordj. vu'o**
> _(That-named Frank and that-named George )_

In spoken English, tone of voice would serve; in written English, one or both sentences would need rewriting.

<span id="sec-8-9"></span><span id="section-relative-clauses-and-vocatives"></span>
### Relative clauses in vocative phrases

Vocative phrases are explained in more detail in [Sec. 6.11](/en/books/cll/6/#sec-6-11). Briefly, they are a method of indicating who a sentence or discourse is addressed to: of identifying the intended listener. They take three general forms, all beginning with cmavo from selma'o COI or DOI (called _vocative words_; there can be one or many), followed by either a name, a selbri, or a sumti. Here are three examples:

<span id="ex-8-74"></span><span id="example-random-id-qMG8"></span>
> _Hello, Frank._

<span id="ex-8-75"></span><span id="example-random-id-qMGj"></span>
> _Goodbye, horse._

<span id="ex-8-76"></span><span id="example-random-id-qmgM"></span>
> _Welcome, Frank and George!_

Note that [8.75](/en/books/cll/8/#ex-8-75) says farewell to something which doesn't really have to be a horse, something that the speaker simply thinks of as being a horse, or even might be something (a person, for example) who is named _Horse_. In a sense, [8.75](/en/books/cll/8/#ex-8-75) is ambiguous between **co'o le xirma** and **co'o la xirma**, a relatively safe semantic ambiguity, since names are ambiguous in general: saying _George_ doesn't distinguish between the possible Georges.

Similarly, [8.74](/en/books/cll/8/#ex-8-74) can be thought of as an abbreviation of:

<span id="ex-8-77"></span><span id="example-random-id-oWPU"></span>
> **coi la frank.**
> _Hello, the-one-named _Frank_._

Syntactically, vocative phrases are a kind of free modifier, and can appear in many places in Lojban text, generally at the beginning or end of some complete construct; or, as in [8.74](/en/books/cll/8/#ex-8-74) to [8.76](/en/books/cll/8/#ex-8-76), as sentences by themselves.

As can be seen, the form of vocative phrases is similar to that of sumti, and as you might expect, vocative phrases allow relative clauses in various places. In vocative phrases which are simple names (after the vocative words), any relative clauses must come just after the names:

<span id="ex-8-78"></span><span id="example-random-id-xECX"></span>
> **coi. frank. poi xunre se--bende**
> _Hello, Frank who is-a-red team-member_
> _Hello, Frank from the Red Team!_

The restrictive relative clause in [8.78](/en/books/cll/8/#ex-8-78) suggests that there is some other Frank (perhaps on the Green Team) from whom this Frank, the one the speaker is greeting, must be distinguished.

A vocative phrase containing a selbri can have relative clauses either before or after the selbri; both forms have the same meaning. Here are some examples:

<span id="ex-8-79"></span><span id="example-random-id-qmgV"></span>
> **co'o poi mi zvati ke'a ku'o xirma**
> _Goodbye, such-that-( I am-at IT ) horse_
> _Goodbye, horse where I am!_

<span id="ex-8-80"></span><span id="example-random-id-qMHc"></span>
> **co'o xirma poi mi zvati**
> _Goodbye, horse such-that-( I am-at-it)._

[8.79](/en/books/cll/8/#ex-8-79) and [8.80](/en/books/cll/8/#ex-8-80) mean the same thing. In fact, relative clauses can appear in both places.

<span id="sec-8-10"></span><span id="section-nesting"></span>
### Relative clauses within relative clauses

For the most part, these are straightforward and uncomplicated: a sumti that is part of a relative clause bridi may itself be modified by a relative clause:

<span id="ex-8-81"></span><span id="example-random-id-TGiu"></span>
> **le prenu poi zvati le kumfa poi blanu cu masno**
> _The person who is-in the room which is-blue -- is-slow._

However, an ambiguity can exist if **ke'a** is used in a relative clause within a relative clause: does it refer to the outermost sumti, or to the sumti within the outer relative clause to which the inner relative clause is attached? The latter. To refer to the former, use a subscript on **ke'a**:

<span id="ex-8-82"></span><span id="example-random-id-8RdM"></span>
> **le prenu poi zvati le kumfa poi ke'axire zbasu ke'a cu masno**
> _The person who is-in the room which IT-sub-2 built IT -- is-slow._
> _The person who is in the room which he built is slow._

Here, the meaning of _IT-sub-2_ is that sumti attached to the second relative clause, counting from the innermost, is used. Therefore, **ke'axipa** (IT-sub-1) means the same as plain **ke'a**.

Alternatively, you can use a prenex (explained in full in [Ch. 16](/en/books/cll/16/#ch-16)), which is syntactically a series of sumti followed by the special cmavo **zo'u**, prefixed to the relative clause bridi:

<span id="ex-8-83"></span><span id="example-random-id-5TuF"></span>
> **le prenu poi ke'a goi ko'a zo'u**
> _The man who (IT = it1 :_

[8.83](/en/books/cll/8/#ex-8-83) is more verbose than [8.82](/en/books/cll/8/#ex-8-82), but may be clearer, since it explicitly spells out the two **ke'a** cmavo, each on its own level, and assigns them to the assignable cmavo **ko'a** and **ko'e** (explained in [Sec. 7.5](/en/books/cll/7/#sec-7-5)).

<span id="sec-8-11"></span><span id="section-relative-clause-cmavo-summary"></span>
### Index of relative clause cmavo

Relative clause introducers (selma'o NOI):

<table>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>**noi**</td>
<td></td>
<td>incidental clauses</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>**poi**</td>
<td></td>
<td>restrictive clauses</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>**voi**</td>
<td></td>
<td>restrictive clauses (non-veridical)</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

Relative phrase introducers (selma'o GOI):

<table>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>**goi**</td>
<td></td>
<td>pro-sumti assignment</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>**pe**</td>
<td></td>
<td>restrictive association</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>**ne**</td>
<td></td>
<td>incidental association</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>**po**</td>
<td></td>
<td>extrinsic (alienable) possession</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>**po'e**</td>
<td></td>
<td>intrinsic (inalienable) possession</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>**po'u**</td>
<td></td>
<td>restrictive identification</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>**no'u**</td>
<td></td>
<td>incidental identification</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

Relativizing pro-sumti (selma'o KOhA):

<table>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>**ke'a**</td>
<td></td>
<td>pro-sumti for relativized sumti</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

Relative clause joiner (selma'o ZIhE):

<table>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>**zi'e**</td>
<td></td>
<td>joins relative clauses applying to a single sumti</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

Relative clause associator (selma'o VUhO):

<table>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>**vu'o**</td>
<td></td>
<td>causes relative clauses to apply to all of a complex sumti</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

Elidable terminators (each its own selma'o):

<table>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>**ku'o**</td>
<td></td>
<td>relative clause elidable terminator</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>**ge'u**</td>
<td></td>
<td>relative phrase elidable terminator</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>
