## Lesson 8. Conversion (SE)

<speaker sprite="koc1">Next, let's look at how we can manipulate our **selbri**—which, in practice, opens up a whole new set of tricks for our **sumti**.</speaker>
<speaker sprite="sor3">Manipulation, huh? Sounds like we're getting into the advanced stuff!</speaker>
<speaker sprite="koc4">It’s actually very intuitive. The **SE series** of words can be attached to a selbri to **swap its x<sub>1</sub> slot** with one of the others (x<sub>2</sub>, x<sub>3</sub>, x<sub>4</sub>, or x<sub>5</sub>).</speaker>
<dl class="drani">
<dt>se</dt>
<dd>swap x<sub>1</sub> and x<sub>2</sub></dd>
<dt>te</dt>
<dd>swap x<sub>1</sub> and x<sub>3</sub></dd>
<dt>ve</dt>
<dd>swap x<sub>1</sub> and x<sub>4</sub></dd>
<dt>xe</dt>
<dd>swap x<sub>1</sub> and x<sub>5</sub></dd>
</dl>

<speaker sprite="sor5">"Swap"? How does that work in practice?</speaker>
<speaker sprite="koc1">Example with **klama**:</speaker>
<dl class="valsi">
<dt>klama</dt>
<dd>x<sub>1</sub> goes to x<sub>2</sub> from x<sub>3</sub> via x<sub>4</sub> by means x<sub>5</sub></dd>
</dl>

> **mi klama ta**
> **ta se klama mi**
> _I go there._

> **mi klama zo'e ti**
> **ti te klama zo'e mi**
> _I go from here._

> **mi klama zo'e zo'e tu**
> **tu ve klama zo'e zo'e mi**
> _I go via there._

> **mi klama zo'e zo'e zo'e ti**
> **ti xe klama zo'e zo'e zo'e mi**
> _I go using this._


<speaker sprite="sor3">I see! So **se** swaps places 1 and 2, **te** swaps 1 and 3, and so on.</speaker>
<speaker sprite="koc5">Exactly. These **conversion** words don't change the underlying meaning—they just change the perspective of the sentence.</speaker>
<speaker sprite="sor1">Is it really worth the extra words?</speaker>
<speaker sprite="koc4">Definitely! For one thing, if you only care about a recipient or a tool and don't care about the giver or the user, it saves you from having to use a bunch of **zo'e**:</speaker>

> **[zo'e] klama zo'e zo'e zo'e ti**
> **ti xe klama [zo'e]**
> _(Someone) goes using this._


<speaker sprite="sor5">Hmm, I guess that is cleaner.</speaker>
<speaker sprite="koc3">But the real magic happens when you combine it with **lo**! This lets you **turn any place slot into a description or title**:</speaker>

> **lo klama ku**
> _goer (x<sub>1</sub> of klama)_

> **lo se klama ku**
> _destination (x<sub>1</sub> of se klama = x<sub>2</sub> of klama)_

> **lo te klama ku**
> _origin_

> **lo ve klama ku**
> _route_

> **lo xe klama ku**
> _vehicle / means_


<speaker sprite="sor7">Whoa, that's a huge power-up for our descriptions!</speaker>
<speaker sprite="sor2">Oh, I get it now! That's what you meant by "widening sumti tricks."</speaker>
<speaker sprite="koc5">Bingo. Whenever you're stuck, just remember: **with se/te/ve/xe, you can use 'lo' to extract any slot from x<sub>2</sub> to x<sub>5</sub>.**</speaker>
