[Next](../vocab2)

[Previous](../semantic)

[Contents](../guarefmn)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# Vocabulary 

A great deal of the machinery of language, which in natural languages is
shared between the grammar and the vocabulary, is handled in *gua\\spi*
purely by words. Here is an explanation of how to say a wide variety of
basic language patterns. Frequently I have thought that some form or
meaning required a new primitive word, or even a change in the grammar,
but it has turned out that existing words were more than adequate if
creatively used. Make this fact your prejudice in similar situations.

A major difference between *gua\\spi* and Old *Loglan* (and, I fear,
*Lojban*) is that *Loglan* relies heavily on metaphor and on the human
ability to understand metaphors, whereas *gua\\spi* compound words mean
what they do because specific rules say how words combine. To say it
differently, the meaning of a *Loglan* compound arises from wishful
thinking, not from rules designed into the language. *Gua\\spi* can
represent metaphors \-\-- efficiently too. But in my *Loglan* writings I
found that about 90% of all compound words could be interpreted
according to rules I uncovered in the definitions, which Jim Brown was
following unconsciously. I expect that even more compounds will turn out
to be lawful in *gua\\spi*, in which the definitions are tailored to
make compounding easy, rather than taking the semantically slippery form
of a true metaphor.

## Functional Categories of Words 

*Gua\\spi* words have a relation between function and morphology. The CV
pattern is for structure words, a few pronouns, and digits. CVV is for
\`\`real\'\' relations, what in English are verbs. CCV is for abstract
\`\`nouns\'\', normally used to denote objects. CCVV is used for more
concrete \`\`nouns\'\' such as species, chemical elements, or household
artifacts. The purpose of these assignments is to cater to the known
proclivities of natural language speakers, who like to segregate nouns
from verbs, and to simplify the process of making words for meanings.
Nothing in the language depends on these assignments, and the language
never actually distinguishes between nouns and verbs. If you find that
some word has a morphological form other than what you expect, this is
simply an effort to keep related words together, and it will have no
effect on the efficiency of the language.

Here is the distribution of *gua\\spi* words by functional and
morphological category. There are 11 V\'s, and 14 regular C\'s. \`:\' is
allowed only in CV words such as *\`\`\^:i\'\'*, and \`#\' does not
count towards differences in words. There are 74 allowed CC digraphs out
of 196 possible pairs; many CC\'s are too hard for people to recognize
reliably.

> Category
>
> Form
>
> Quantity
>
> Total
>
> Prefixes
>
> CV
>
> 61
>
> 61
>
> Pronouns
>
> CV,CCVV
>
> 54
>
> Digits
>
> CV
>
> 26
>
>      Other structure words
>
> 80
>
> Primitives
>
> CVV
>
> 568
>
> Primitives
>
> CCVV
>
> 532
>
> Letterals
>
> CCVV
>
> 104
>
>      Predicates
>
> 1410
>
>          Total words
>
> 1551

> Form
>
> Used
>
> Available
>
> Fraction Used
>
> CV
>
> 98
>
> 165
>
> 59%
>
> CCV
>
> 206
>
> 814
>
> 25%
>
> CVV
>
> 568
>
> 1694
>
> 34%
>
> CCVV
>
> 679
>
> 8954
>
> 8%

## Word Creation 

The words of natural languages appear to be arbitrary symbol strings of
tremendous variety of sound. *Gua\\spi* is similar in that its words
were generated by a partially random process. To begin, the word lists
of *Loglan* \[L4\] and *Lojban* \[Lja\] were merged and some additional
words were added. For most words an English, Chinese and Latin
translation was determined.

Then experimental phonetic data \[NB2\] was used to assess candidate
words for the ease with which speakers could recognize them. For each
*gua\\spi* meaning, randomly generated word candidates were evaluated
for recognizability, for distance from other *gua\\spi* words, and also
for similarity to their natural language equivalents. The final
assignments were determined through a process of numerical annealing so
as to maximize the summed quality scores.

Because the words are modestly similar to their natural language
counterparts, learners are helped a bit in remembering them; and the
sound patterns are anchored to forms known to please humans, since a
prior attempt with purely random sounds was unacceptably ugly. The base
natural languages included English because it is very widely spoken,
Chinese (Mandarin) for the same reason, and Latin as a proxy for the
other European languages, all of which have been influenced heavily by
Latin. (Latinoid English words were avoided.) Both *Loglan* and *Lojban*
use many more natural languages as word creation fodder.

CV structure words were assigned by hand; related structure words, like
articles, have the same C and varying V\'s. Structure words pertaining
to numbered cases have the same V\'s as the corresponding digits, but
contrasting consonants, making learning easier.

A question often asked is, why create new words? Why not use Chinese or
English words? First, some attempt has been made to keep *gua\\spi*
culturally neutral, and if Chinese words were used it would intimidate
English speakers and vice versa. More important, Chinese words are
designed for use with Chinese. Many required meanings, like articles,
simply do not exist in Chinese, and similarly in English. And those
meanings that are present are only approximations of the *gua\\spi*
meanings; while users have to invest a lot of effort to learn the new
words and their definitions, they will find it even harder to keep
straight what a word of their native language \`\`really\'\' means in
*gua\\spi*. That is why the approach was rejected of simply stealing
natural language vocabulary.

Given some set, a \`\`basis\'\' is a subset from which all its members
can be derived, as with vectors. Each vector space has a specific
dimension, or number of basis elements, but words are not so simple.
*Loglan* has about 1000 primitive words and it was intended that
virtually any meaning should be achievable as combinations of these
words; that is, the primitive words form a basis of nearly all meanings.
Experiment proved that this intention had been accomplished for the most
part, but that as anticipated, some areas were incompletely or
imprecisely covered. The *Lojban* project of LeChevalier \[Lja\] is a
continuation of Brown\'s work on *Loglan* \[L1\], and he has added about
300 primitive words, mainly about human emotion and interaction. For
*gua\\spi* I took over LeChevalier\'s primitive word list, with his kind
assistance. I rewrote all the definitions to match *gua\\spi* usage. I
also added and deleted a small number of words to deal with specific
*gua\\spi* issues, and I expanded the scientific vocabulary in
mathematics, chemistry, zoology, botany and agriculture. As a result,
*gua\\spi* has about 1400 primitive words. Some people are interested to
discover just how few basis words we can get by with. However, I have
experience with the *Loglan* word list and I have confidence in its
ability to handle the required meanings; and while I do not believe it
is minimal, I think it is fairly close. Thus I chose to use existing
word lists for *gua\\spi* rather than to try for radical pruning or *de
novo* creation.

## Words and Grammar 

### [Phrase-Relative Pronouns] 

The CCVV pattern is used for organized groups of noun-type words such as
the phrase-relative pronouns. These words have a CCV part and a final V,
which matches the V in the caselink and the conversion for the same
case, as well as the corresponding digit.

> 1st part
>
> Phrase where antecedent of pronoun is located
>
> zdm
>
> Phrase that pronoun is in
>
> xdr
>
> Phrase restricted by phrase containing pronoun
>
> vgr
>
> Phrase to which replies are directed
>
> xgn
>
> Enclosing main-level sentence
>
> zgl
>
> Previous main-level sentence
>
> Last letter
>
> Which case is represented
>
> o
>
> 1st case
>
> u
>
> 2nd case
>
> a
>
> 3rd case
>
> e
>
> 4th case
>
> i
>
> 5th case
>
> y
>
> The whole phrase

Here is a list of all the phrase-relative pronouns. There is also
*\`\`zgln\'\'* meaning \`\`the previous discourse in general\'\' and
*\`\`zglr\'\'* meaning \`\`the event just finished or still
continuing\'\'.

> Phrase
>
> 1
>
> 2
>
> 3
>
> 4
>
> 5th
>
> Case (converted) of phrase . . .
>
> *zdmy*
>
> *zdmo*
>
> *zdmu*
>
> *zdma*
>
> *zdme*
>
> *zdmi*
>
> That the pronoun is in
>
> *xdry*
>
> *xdro*
>
> *xdru*
>
> *xdra*
>
> *xdre*
>
> *xdri*
>
> Being restricted
>
> *xgny*
>
> *xgno*
>
> *xgnu*
>
> *xgna*
>
> *xgne*
>
> *xgni*
>
> Enclosing top level sentence
>
> *zgly*
>
> *zglo*
>
> *zglu*
>
> *zgla*
>
> *zgle*
>
> *zgli*
>
> Previous top level sentence
>
> *vgry*
>
> *vgro*
>
> *vgru*
>
> *vgra*
>
> *vgre*
>
> *vgri*
>
> Question to be answered

### Letterals 

Letterals are words representing letters, which are built up on a
regular pattern like the pronouns are. A letteral means \`\`X1 is an
instance of the letter (whatever)\'\'. *\`\`zu -fma !xo
-\<letteral\>\'\'* is the right way to say that something has the shape
of a letter. To spell a word, compound the letters start to end. The
result means \`\`X1 is an instance of something spelled (whatever)\'\'.

Among letterals there are different forms for V\'s and C\'s, and upper
and lower case in two alphabets are supported. The first table shows
stem forms arranged phonetically, while the second shows what to
substitute for the asterisks to signal alphabets and cases.

> p
>
> *psl\**
>
> f
>
> *fsl\**
>
> b
>
> *bzl\**
>
> v
>
> *vzl\**
>
> m
>
> *\*\*lm*
>
> u
>
> *\*\*lu*
>
> t
>
> *tfl\**
>
> s
>
> *sfl\**
>
> d
>
> *dvl\**
>
> z
>
> *zvl\**
>
> n
>
> *\*\*ln*
>
> o
>
> *\*\*lo*
>
> c
>
> *cfl\**
>
> q
>
> *qfl\**
>
> j
>
> *jvl\**
>
> x
>
> *xvl\**
>
> l
>
> *\*\*rl*
>
> i
>
> *\*\*li*
>
> k
>
> *kfl\**
>
> g
>
> *gvl\**
>
> w
>
> *\*\*lw*
>
> y
>
> *\*\*ly*
>
> e
>
> *\*\*le*
>
> :
>
> *:zla*
>
> \#
>
> *#vla*
>
> r
>
> *\*\*lr*
>
> a
>
> *\*\*la*

To select cases and alphabets, use these for \* or \*\*:

> \*
>
> \*\*
>
> Alphabet
>
> Case
>
> a
>
> bx
>
> Roman
>
> Lower
>
> e
>
> dx
>
> Roman
>
> Upper
>
> y
>
> vx
>
> Greek
>
> Lower
>
> o
>
> zx
>
> Greek
>
> Upper

The relation of Greek letters to *gua\\spi* Roman letters is basically
phonetic; the arbitrary assignments below are marked by \`\*\'. The
\`:\' can be used for the aspiration mark, an apostrophe in Greek or
\`h\' in English transliteration, as in \`\`Hellas\'\'. In principle one
can also use a form like *\`\`tler -fn -:alfa\'\'* (the letter alpha) to
refer to Greek letters.

> p
>
> Pi
>
> f
>
> Phi
>
> b
>
> Beta
>
> v
>
> Psi\*
>
> m
>
> Mu
>
> u
>
> Upsilon
>
> t
>
> Tau
>
> s
>
> Sigma
>
> d
>
> Delta
>
> z
>
> Zeta
>
> n
>
> Nu
>
> o
>
> Omicron
>
> c
>
> Chi\*
>
> q
>
> Theta\*
>
> j
>
> \-\--
>
> x
>
> Xi\*
>
> l
>
> Lambda
>
> i
>
> Iota
>
> k
>
> Kappa
>
> g
>
> Gamma
>
> w
>
> Omega\*
>
> y
>
> Eta
>
> e
>
> Epsilon
>
> :
>
> \'
>
> \#
>
> \-\--
>
> r
>
> Rho
>
> a
>
> Alpha

In English we use acronyms freely, but in *gua\\spi* the letterals for
the acronym are as long or longer than the words themselves. It is
better to make an ordinary compound word for the concept.

### Foreign Words 

It is the policy in *gua\\spi* to use foreign words as-is (except for
necessary mangling to make them fit the CV pattern), to represent the
names of foreign people, places, flora, fauna, units of measure, foods,
clothes, and so on. Certain of these word categories have a few members
assigned CCV words. These are in *gua\\spi* because they were in
*Loglan*, and they were in *Loglan* because they occurred with high
frequency in European literature. In *Loglan* it has proven impractical
to manufacture in-language primitive words for every possible primitive,
not for lack of word space but rather because those working on the
language have other issues to attend to than making a continuous stream
of predicates. For example, such an obvious animal as \`\`bear\'\'
didn\'t make it into *Loglan* and probably never will. *Gua\\spi* will
have primitive words for more fauna and flora, but as in *Loglan*, the
majority of species will never have *gua\\spi* primitive words, and
neither will most ethnic foods, foreign countries, provincial units and
so on.

When foreign words fit neatly into the language, speakers are tempted to
over-use them. Agglutinative languages like *gua\\spi* and *Loglan* have
great power to produce compound words with quite precise meanings, and
speakers should try very hard to learn to produce such words. It is a
fact that despite *Loglan*\'s limited set of nouns and, at that time,
its lack of foreign words, I was able to write about 20,000 words of
text while inventing only four unapproved primitive words (and a fifth
was made for me after the fact): bear, torus, tape, noodle and oar.
Speakers of *gua\\spi* should try to emulate this performance and to use
foreign words only for truly local concepts, such as the \`\`\|mu\'\' (a
Chinese area unit for land) or \`\`adobo\'\' (a Filipino chicken stew).

See the discussion under [Pronouns: Foreign
Words](pronouns.html#c-foreign) about attaching foreign words to
*gua\\spi* predicates to provide cases.

### Retroactive Downjumps 

Sentences are usually connected by a retroactive downjump
*\`\`\^:o\'\'*. With this operator the preceeding sentence is taken out
of the discourse and is inserted in the first case of the word following
*\`\`\^:o\'\'* (which will need a default *\`\`vo\'\'*). Thus the
following two sentences are equivalent:

> *\^:i -dae !kara \^:o -bal !crw \|jro \^tara \^kseo*
>
> If the box is open then maybe the rat will eat the cheese (With
> retroactive downjump)
>
> *\^:i !vo -ge -dae !kara !fu -bal !crw \|jro \^tara \^kseo*
>
> (With explicit infinitive)

The form with the explicit infinitive is more natural in *gua\\spi*.
When retroactive downjumps are allowed you have to finish an entire
sentence structure and hear the next word, possibly a downjump, before
you can place the structure in the parse tree. However, all natural
languages allow afterthought sentence connectives as in the above
examples, and speakers rarely use forethought forms where the beginning
of the antecedent sentence is marked. I wonder if users might resist an
absolute requirement to put *\`\`!vo -ge\'\'* at the beginning of the
antecedent sentence.

Speakers, please try to minimize the use of retroactive downjumps. We
shall see if it is feasible to outlaw them completely.

Since the antecedent sentence starts out at the top level, it is
asserted by default and remains thus after the downjump. The consequent
sentence is an ordinary infinitive, which is not asserted. If you wish
to assert it, or the antecedent when not using the retroactive downjump,
put in a *\`\`ge\'\'* prefix as shown for the explicit infinitive
antecedent.

A sentence start word *\`\`\^:u\'\'* connects sentences with coordinated
arguments, and such a group acts as a unit for retroactive downjumps.
*\`\`\^:e\'\'* also makes such units, but the arguments are not
coordinated. More complicated groupings are best handled by making
explicit infinitive arguments out of the component sentences and using
*\`\`ge\'\'* to assert them, or by assigning names to the sentences and
subsequently asserting a causal relation among the antecedents of the
names.

The retroactive downjump *\`\`fy\'\'* relocates the sub-phrase before it
at the same level, to become the first case of the following predicate
at the same level. It roughly translates the infix \`\`and\'\' that
connects a list of arguments in English. For example,

> *\^:i !tara /crw !kseo \^fy -tla !qkao \|spl /ftu =plyw*
>
> The rat eats the cheese *and* the cookie *and* the apple (an unordered
> set)
>
> *\^:i !ji /vlw !qo -:nuarko \^fy -stl !qo -trentn \^qo -prinstn*
>
> I travelled to Newark *and* Trenton *and* Princeton (an ordered list)

This is one way to do multiple arguments (see also the section [just
below](vocab1.html#conjunctions)), and is just about the only use for
*\`\`fy\'\'* \-\-- but difficult for hard-core English speakers to give
up. Needless to say, the retroactive downjump is not mandatory.
\`\`*tla*-set\'\' is used when the arguments form an unordered
collection, while \`\`*stl*-list\'\' is for arguments that have a
sequence. Both words take as many arguments as you wish.

When a sentence is complicated, one can use \`\`*fl*-begin\'\' and
\`\`*fr*-end\'\' to mark the beginning and end of a grammatical unit. A
matching pair of *\`\`fl\'\'* and *\`\`fr\'\'* are supposed to be at the
same grammatical level; if they are not, someone has made an error. They
have no meaning beyond this checking function.

### Error Correction 

Another organizational transformation related to the retroactive
downjump is error correction with *\`\`fa\'\'*. When prefixed to a
phrase, it causes the previous phrase at the same level to vanish and to
be replaced by the one that follows. *\`\`/fi -fa\'\'* is a quick way to
delete the current sentence. For example,

> *\^:i !ji /vyu !gunu !ju /fa !diu -sui \|zu -ken !ju*
>
> I like your ass, I mean, your class
>
> *\^:i -po !ju /crw !ftu =plyw \|zey !ji /fi -fa*
>
> Did you eat my apple . . . Forget it.

## Subphrase Forms 

### [Conjunctions, Mixtures and Masses] 

The conjunction *\`\`fe\'\'* has several functions depending on what it
joins. First, when it joins phrase predicates it makes a collection of
phrases with the same arguments; usually it is unseen in this function
since the first tone \`-\' is usually sufficient to cue a parallel
phrase compound.

> *\^:i !jo [/cyr]{.underline} [-tai]{.underline} !sa-kqua*
>
> Everyone *get out* of the water
>
> *\^:i !qu -jaiw =tiri /cur -cie [!qka]{.underline} [-pne]{.underline}
> !qno =cail*
>
> Tigereye cuts a *hole through* the piece of steel

Despite our monkeylike eagerness to treat these words as units, we
should remember that in *gua\\spi* there are phrases being conjoined.
Thus everyone is told to go from the water *and* to be out of the water;
and the result of cutting is both a hole *and* goes through the steel;
the referent of this argument satisfies two predicates.

*\`\`fe\'\'* also can join arguments. The first of the following
examples shows a conjunction with *\`\`fe\'\'* in which successive
arguments are joined into one. (For details, see [Semantics: Cartesian
Expansion](semantic.html#S-conjunction).) The second example shows the
same sentence rendered with \`\`*tla*-set\'\' in which the set members
are listed. *\`\`fe\'\'* produces referents only in extension whereas
*\`\`tla\'\'* produces a set in suitable context. There is a similar
word \`\`*stl*-list\'\' when the arguments must have a specific order.
For both words you may give as many arguments as you need.

> *\^:i !kmau \^fe -kani /crw !tara \^fe -gara*
>
> The cat and the cow eat the rat and the grass
>
> *\^:i !tla !kmau \^kani /fi -crw !tla !tara \^gara*
>
> (The same with sets)

Here is a particularly troublesome example of \`\`or\'\' in a set of
arguments:

> *\^:i \|vi -pli \^jo /sle !xo -zu -co \^xo -psuw =fiei \^fe -xo -psuw
> =cawi \^fe -xo -qkmy*
>
> Coffee, tea or milk? (Please choose one from the list)

Mixtures are expressed in several ways.

> *\^:i !faia !do /fi -gai !xy -fpyl \|sew !fkl \^qki*
>
> Its face was covered by blue-gray fur \-\-- in the overlap (*sew*)
> between blue and gray
>
> *\^:i !flyl /zar !dvr \^vba \^fkl*
>
> The flag is red, white and blue \-\-- some parts in each color (*zar*)
>
> *\^:i !jw /dmy !qkmy \^qtaw \|zu -dma !xo -bimi*
>
> This is a mixture (*dmy*) of milk and honey (sugar from bees)

*Loglan* has a concept of a \`\`mass individual\'\'. According to
Brown \[L1\] it is more characteristic of non-Western cultures. Here is
my best explanation of it. Take the full referent set of an argument,
and personify it so that, potentially at least, it is the same kind of
thing as its members. For example, all sharks can be considered to be
instances or manifestations of an archetypical shark god. This composite
object is the mass individual. In *Loglan*, arguments in the \`\`serving
or portion\'\' category, like \`\`*cutri*-water\'\', generally are used
as mass individuals.

Concepts and features which in other languages seem unitary are revealed
in *gua\\spi* to be various. The mixtures above are one example, and
mass individuals are another. Here are some examples related to mass
individuals. Note that *\`\`xo\'\'* is the default first case article
for servings and portions and so in argument sites with the normal
default you need not say *\`\`xo\'\'*.

> *!xo -kqua*
>
> A portion of water (any one)
>
> *!xe -kqua*
>
> The portion of water
>
> *!xe -psu -kqua*
>
> The water molecule
>
> *!xy -fpyl*
>
> The hair (set)
>
> *!xy -sur -fpyl*
>
> The fur (emphasizing repetition)

### Named Arguments 

> *\^:i !qo -:mobi -dyk /kqnu \|bir \^sa -qo -german -:melvyl*
>
> *Moby Dick* was written by Herman Melville
>
> *\^:i !qu -jaiw =tiri /fom !qu -kmaw =za -tye =tlme \|va -zo -kqnu !sa
> -ji*
>
> Tigereye is a character in *The Welding Shop,* which I wrote
>
> *\^:i !qu -gua \|xim !cfle /vu -zu -ziu !sa -kmi =xi -kmum /fi -pror
> \|bir \^sa -xu -tla !qo -krnygan \^qo -:ryci*
>
> *The \`\`C\'\' Programming Language* was written by Kernighan and
> Ritchie
>
> *\^:i !qu -vo -tri -qtu =jy /zu -xim !xgnl \|qe -zo -zymu !sa -qo
> -gabriel -fora*
>
> *Requiem* by Gabriel Fauré (title on the score)

\`\`Moby Dick\'\' is a bit ambiguous; it names both the book and the
whale in it. The fault lies with the author for using one name for two
referents. In any case, it is obvious what a foreign name means when
referring to an object or a person. In the second example we have two
*gua\\spi* predicate names, conveniently all compound words so that they
feel the same as the foreign names. But in the third example the
predicate name is quite intricate, extends over three grammatical
levels, and includes an imbedded name, \`\`C\'\', represented by a
letteral. Nonetheless the principle is the same; *\`\`qu\'\'* converts
the following phrase into a name.

The fourth example is perhaps the most difficult: the declaration of a
title. The title is not part of the discourse but rather tells about it,
hence it takes the form of a decoration with *\`\`vi\'\'* in a
nonsentence. With it the by-line appears in the usual form for setting a
modal case default.

### Modal Cases 

Here are examples of the most important modal cases. However, virtually
any word with two or more cases can be construed as a modal operator. Be
alert for creative opportunities for expression.

*cnu*

Present tense

*\^:i !ji /za -ven !su -fkar \^vu [-cnu]{.underline} !jrn !ji \^pra
!fkar*

I will buy the car *when* I have earned its price

*bir*

Past tense

*\^:i !ji /crw !kseo \^vu [-bir]{.underline} !jun -vnl !tara*

I ate the cheese *before* the rat came hunting

*jro*

Future tense

*\^:i !ji /qma -klo !kara \^vu [-jro]{.underline} !crw !tara \^kseo \|zu
-vel !kara*

I closed the box *after* the rat ate the cheese in it

*jir*

The location of an event

*\^:i !ji /fom !zu -plu [\|jir]{.underline} !pil -fn -:olimpu*

I performed in the Olympic games, the games *at* Mount Olympus

*zey*

Genitive or possessive case: a relation of pertinence

*\^:i !trer =ji /dri !fkar [\|zey]{.underline} !ji*

My brother is driving *my* car

*jai*

The speaker

*\^:i [\|jai]{.underline} !qo -kira /ju /dwu -csn -zu -jeu*

*Said* Kira, \`\`You\'re a monster\'\'

*koy*

The thinker, analogous to the speaker

*\^:i [\|koy]{.underline} !qo -kira /dri -fli /bni -siw -dan \|qma*

*Thought* Kira, \`\`The pilot needs to be rescued\'\'

*qnu*

Vocative case: the listener paying attention

*\^:i [\|qnu]{.underline} !qo -jan /tara /jun !kseo !zey !ju*

*John,* the rat is after your cheese

*ciw*

The holder of a subjective opinion

*\^:i !xi -tara /fpl [\|ciw]{.underline} !ji*

Rats are beautiful, I *feel*

*gae*

The experiencer of an emotion (most have a case for this)

*\^:i !ju /csn [\|gae]{.underline} !ji*

You\'re wierd, I *feel*

*sen*

The experiencer of an objective sensation

*\^:i !ftu -plyw /qke [\|sen]{.underline} !ji*

The apple tastes \[is\] sour *to me*

*brm*

What something is part of (many parts have a case for this)

*-xo -bryr [\|brm]{.underline} !dowu !ji*

A brick *of* my house

*tum*

The instrument for doing an event

*\^:i !qo -kira /qma -pai !cana [\^vu]{.underline} [-tum]{.underline}
!tuen*

Kira bailed the boat \[made it drain\] *with* the bucket

*zia*

The way or manner of an event

*\^:i !xau =spa \|cana /fi -fli [\|zia]{.underline} !fli !xi -bryr*

The space shuttle (roundtrip spaceship) flies *like* a brick (flies)

*fta*

A standard or rule

*\^:i !xo -dair \|xnu -syry -fn -:ameri-ka !co -ce /fi -pwo !ze -flu
\|xnu -fn -:ampere !co -cy \^fi [-vu]{.underline} [-fta]{.underline} !za
-gul !xi -tyil \^se -zina*

A wire of 14 AWG \[American Wire Gauge\] can carry 15 amperes *according
to* the National Electrical Code

*vrl*

The reference frame

*\^:i !guna /xbr [\|vrl]{.underline} !qura \|va -jmo -vjr*

The snake is horizontal *relative to* the branch, which is almost
vertical

*plm*

Such as: an example

*-xi -pso [\|psi]{.underline} \^vu -plm !xi -kai \|kei*

Bad people *such as* thieves

There are several moderately complex cases, such as
\`\`*tue*-culture\'\', and \`\`*fta*-standard for judgement\'\', which
are relevant to only four or five words each. These are served by modal
cases as a matter of policy, rather than having numbered cases on each
word.

### Tenses and Aspects 

In English and all Indo-European languages, every sentence has a tense,
that is, the syntax indicates (with great complexity) when the sentence
occurred. Stories, for example, frequently have every narrative sentence
in the past tense. *Gua\\spi* uses instead the modal case default for
tense, and explicit tense modal cases appear only for sentences off the
default. The sentence start word *\`\`\^:a\'\'* links sentences that
occur in sequence. Here are some example sentences with tenses.

> *\^:i !tara /crw !kseo \^vu [-cnu]{.underline} !vn -juw -qana*
>
> The rat ate the cheese *at* midnight
>
> *\^:i !tara /crw !qkao -spl \^vu [-jro]{.underline} !xdry !su -kseo*
>
> The rat ate the cookie *after* \[it ate\] the cheese
>
> *[\^:a]{.underline} !kmau /crw !tara*
>
> *Then* the cat ate the rat
>
> *\^:i [\|qe]{.underline} [-bir]{.underline} \|fto \^jn /vu -qe -jro
> \|pql \^cyr -xyn !qo -kaesar \^qo -gal*
>
> A long time ago, Caesar had just entered Gaul (a nonsentence, it
> asserts nothing but does set the tense default)

In Russian, every verb is formally assigned an \`\`aspect\'\':
\`\`perfective\'\', meaning that the sentence\'s event is considered as
a unit, including its completion, and \`\`imperfective\'\', meaning that
the predicated relation is continuous. English has these aspects too,
though each verb can have either aspect depending on a moderately
complicated syntactic cue (\`\`ing\'\' for imperfective and various
others for perfective). Speakers also like to distinguish a
\`\`completed\'\' versus \`\`aborted\'\' aspect, whether an event
reached its usual conclusion. In *gua\\spi* the unmodified predicates
are perfective or imperfective according to their meanings, but
subordinate clauses or compounding words can express whatever aspects
are necessary. Here are a few aspects in *gua\\spi*:

> *\^:i !xo -kqua [/tiu]{.underline} -flu !se -bil !bryo*
>
> Water *continuously* flows under the bridge (imperfective)
>
> *\^:i !tara /crw [\|scu]{.underline} \^kseo*
>
> The rat *completely* eats the cheese (perfective)
>
> *\^:i !kmau [/qem]{.underline} -jun -xna !tara*
>
> The cat *tries to* catch the rat (might or might not succeed)
>
> *\^:i !kmau [/qai]{.underline} -jun -xna !tara*
>
> The cat *fails to* catch the rat (though it tries)

### Decorations 

A decoration is a short subordinate clause. Sometimes it expresses the
speaker\'s attitude about the sentence or the relation between
sentences, in which case its prefix is *\`\`vi\'\'*, or it can be a
subordinate assertion with *\`\`va\'\'*, or an actual part of the main
assertion, with *\`\`vu\'\'* or \`\|\' tone.

*bwy*

On the other hand; Contrast

*\^:i !ji /pql -gal \^:i [\|vi -zo -bwy]{.underline} \^ji /bzu*

I am short; *on the other hand*, I am wide.

*smy*

Similarly, Likewise

*\^:i !ji /jie -crw \^:e [\|vi -zo -smy]{.underline} \^ji /jie -byw*

I am hungry, and likewise I am thirsty

*csn*

Strangely

*\^:i [\|vi -csn]{.underline} \^tara /go -crw !kseo*

*Strangely*, the rat didn\'t eat the cheese

*spo*

Maybe

*\^:i [\|spo]{.underline} \^kqu /zu -vel !kara -zgy \|zey =ji*

*Maybe* food is in my refrigerator

*zba*

Likely

*\^:i [\|zba]{.underline} /fpu !kqu \|zu -vel !kara -zgy \|zey =ji*

*Probably* the food in my refrigerator is spoiled

*tfn*

Importantly

*\^:i [\|vi -zo -tfn]{.underline} \^jo /ser -sui*

*Importantly*, you must study

*tsu*

Suddenly

*\^:i \|qe -jai !do [\^ve -tsu]{.underline} \^ve -fto -faw . . .*

He says *suddenly* and very emphatically . . .

*jiw*

Surprise

*\^:i [\|va -jiw]{.underline} \^cana -fer /vnl*

*Hey,* the barge is coming

*pli*

Please

*\^:i [\|vi -pli]{.underline} \^jo /pin -dwo*

Please be patient

*gny*

Kindly

*\^:i [\|vi -gny]{.underline} \^jo /gey !xo -kqua \^ji*

*Kindly* give me some water

*faw*

Exclamation Point

*\^:i [\|faw]{.underline} \^jw /pei -bil !ji \^kqua*

He dunked me!

*din*

Do Back

*\^:i \|ql \^jo /pei -bil !jw [\|din]{.underline} /kqua*

So dunk him *back*

*gza*

Start of Paragraph

*\^:i [\|vi -gza]{.underline} \^qu -jaiw =tiri /qou !dvu \|jir =zna*

¶ Tigereye watches the waves in the canal

*qti*

Thesis (Topic Sentence)

*\^:i [\|vi -qti]{.underline} \^gua =spi /pwo !xa jy \|zu -pwo !gua =fn
-:ewlan*

*Gua\\spi* can do everything English can do

*sku*

Thus, Conclusion

*\^:i [\|vi -sku]{.underline} \^zge \|xne !gua =vdm \^gua =cin /fi -klo
\|va -ge -qma !gua !spi*

Thus the gap between human and machine languages is closed by *gua\\spi*

*tl*

Sequence Decoration

*\^:i !vo -gi -vgry /gi -kau -tiw !vem \|zu -tw \^ji \^vu -cnu \^va -zu
-plm !qo -:mei -ci [\|tl -co]{.underline}*

That would relieve me of many present troubles, Mei Chi being *number
one*

*va*

That Is

*\^:i !ji /kio !xo -kqu [\|va]{.underline} -ftu =plyw*

I have some food, *that is*, an apple

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next](../vocab2)

[Previous](../semantic)

[Contents](../guarefmn)
