<a id="id-1.24"></a>Lojban Words Glossary
=========================================

All definitions in this glossary are brief and unofficial. Only the published dictionary is a truly official reference for word definitions. These definitions are here simply as a quick reference.

<a id="valsi-a"></a>.a

logical connective: sumti afterthought or.

<a id="valsi-abu"></a>.abu

letteral for a.

<a id="valsi-ahe"></a>.a'e

attitudinal: alertness - exhaustion.

<a id="valsi-aho"></a>.a'o

attitudinal: hope - despair.

<a id="valsi-ahu"></a>.a'u

attitudinal: interest - disinterest - repulsion.

<a id="valsi-ai"></a>.ai

attitudinal: intent - indecision - rejection/refusal.

<a id="valsi-ainai"></a>.ainai

attitudinal: intent - indecision - rejection/refusal.

<a id="valsi-au"></a>.au

attitudinal: desire - indifference - reluctance.

<a id="valsi-ba"></a>ba

time tense relation/direction: will \[selbri\]; after \[sumti\]; default future tense.

mi ba bevri — I will bring it.

le'e snuti ba fasnu — Accidents will happen.

mi pu na ku kufra ba le nu ra cinba mi — I felt uncomfortable after she kissed me.

<a id="valsi-badri"></a>badribadri

x1 is sad/depressed/dejected/\[unhappy/feels sorrow/grief\] about x2 (abstraction).

<a id="valsi-baha"></a>ba'a

evidential: I expect - I experience - I remember.

<a id="valsi-bahacuhi"></a>ba'acu'i

evidential: I expect - I experience - I remember.

<a id="valsi-bahanai"></a>ba'anai

evidential: I expect - I experience - I remember.

<a id="valsi-bahe"></a>ba'e

forethought emphasis indicator; indicates next word is especially emphasized.

mi djuno le du'u ma kau darxi ba'e la .alis. — I know who hit Alice specifically.

vajni ba'e mi — It's important to me (!)

<a id="valsi-baho"></a>ba'o

interval event contour: in the aftermath of ...; since ...; retrospective/perfect | |----.

<a id="valsi-bai"></a>baibai

bapli modal, 1st place (forced by) forcedly; compelled by force ...

<a id="valsi-bajra"></a>bajrabajra

x1 runs on surface x2 using limbs x3 with gait x4.

<a id="valsi-bakrecpaho"></a>bakrecpa'o

p1\=r1 is a steak/beefsteak (flat cut of beef) from cow/cattle/kine/ox p2\=r2\=b1.

<a id="valsi-bakri"></a>bakribakri

x1 is a quantity of/contains/is made of chalk from source x2 in form x3.

<a id="valsi-baku"></a>baku

after that, in future

<a id="valsi-balsoi"></a>balsoi

s1\=b1 is a great soldier of army s2 great in property b2 (ka) by standard b3.

<a id="valsi-balvi"></a>balvibalvi

x1 is in the future of/later than/after x2 in time sequence; x1 is latter; x2 is former.

<a id="valsi-banfi"></a>banfibanfi

x1 is an amphibian of species/breed x2.

<a id="valsi-bangu"></a>bangubangu

x1 is a/the language/dialect used by x2 to express/communicate x3 (si'o/du'u, not quote).

xu do se bangu la .lojban. — Do you speak Lojban?

ra tavla fo le bangu be fi le mabla — He used foul language.

<a id="valsi-banli"></a>banlibanli

x1 is great/grand in property x2 (ka) by standard x3.

<a id="valsi-banzu"></a>banzubanzu

x1 (object) suffices/is enough/sufficient for purpose x2 under conditions x3.

<a id="valsi-bapu"></a>bapu

time tense: will have been; (tense/modal).

<a id="valsi-barda"></a>bardabarda

x1 is big/large in property/dimension(s) x2 (ka) as compared with standard/norm x3.

<a id="valsi-bartu"></a>bartubartu

x1 is on the outside of x2; x1 is exterior to x2.

<a id="valsi-basti"></a>bastibasti

x1 replaces/substitutes for/instead of x2 in circumstance x3; x1 is a replacement/substitute.

<a id="valsi-basygau"></a>basygau

g1 (agent) replaces/substitutes b1 for/instead of b2 in circumstance b3.

<a id="valsi-batci"></a>batcibatci

x1 bites/pinches x2 on/at specific locus x3 with x4.

<a id="valsi-bau"></a>baubau

bangu modal, 1st place in language ...

<a id="valsi-bavlahi"></a>bavla'i

b1\=l1 is next after b2\=l2 in sequence l3.

<a id="valsi-bavlamdei"></a>bavlamdei

d1\=b1\=l1 is tomorrow; d1\=b1\=l1 is the day following b2\=l2, day standard d3.

<a id="valsi-baxso"></a>baxsobaxso

x1 reflects Malay-Indonesian common language/culture in aspect x2.

<a id="valsi-bazi"></a>bazi

soon ...

<a id="valsi-baziku"></a>baziku

soon

<a id="valsi-bazu"></a>bazu

in a long time ..

<a id="valsi-be"></a>be

sumti link to attach sumti (default x2) to a selbri; used in descriptions.

le tixnu be mi cu melbi — My daughter is pretty.

<a id="valsi-bebna"></a>bebnabebna

x1 is foolish/silly in event/action/property \[folly\] (ka) x2; x1 is a boob.

<a id="valsi-beha"></a>be'a

location tense relation/direction; north of.

<a id="valsi-beho"></a>be'o

elidable terminator: end linked sumti in specified description.

<a id="valsi-behu"></a>be'u

attitudinal modifier: lack/need - presence/satisfaction - satiation.

<a id="valsi-bei"></a>bei

separates multiple linked sumti within a selbri; used in descriptions.

<a id="valsi-bemro"></a>bemrobemro

x1 reflects North American culture/nationality/geography in aspect x2.

<a id="valsi-bengo"></a>bengobengo

x1 reflects Bengali/Bangladesh culture/nationality/language in aspect x2.

<a id="valsi-bernanjudri"></a>bernanjudri

j1 is the latitude/declination of j2 in system j3.

<a id="valsi-bersa"></a>bersabersa

x1 is a son of mother/father/parents x2 \[not necessarily biological\].

<a id="valsi-berti"></a>bertiberti

x1 is to the north/northern side \[right-hand-rule pole\] of x2 according to frame of reference x3.

<a id="valsi-bihe"></a>bi'e

prefixed to a mex operator to indicate high priority.

<a id="valsi-bihi"></a>bi'i

non-logical interval connective: unordered between ... and ...

<a id="valsi-biho"></a>bi'o

non-logical interval connective: ordered from ... to ...

<a id="valsi-bihu"></a>bi'u

discursive: newly introduced information - previously introduced information.

<a id="valsi-bihunai"></a>bi'unai

discursive: newly introduced information - previously introduced information.

<a id="valsi-bilga"></a>bilgabilga

x1 is bound/obliged to/has the duty to do/be x2 in/by standard/agreement x3; x1 must do x2.

<a id="valsi-bilma"></a>bilmabilma

x1 is ill/sick/diseased with symptoms x2 from disease x3.

<a id="valsi-bindo"></a>bindobindo

x1 reflects Indonesian culture/nationality/language in aspect x2.

<a id="valsi-birka"></a>birkabirka

x1 is a/the arm \[body-part\] of x2; \[metaphor: branch with strength\].

<a id="valsi-bitmu"></a>bitmubitmu

x1 is a wall/fence separating x2 and x3 (unordered) of/in structure x4.

<a id="valsi-blabi"></a>blabiblabi

x1 is white/very-light colored \[color adjective\].

<a id="valsi-blaci"></a>blaciblaci

x1 is a quantity of/is made of/contains glass of composition including x2.

<a id="valsi-blakanla"></a>blakanla

x1 is an eye of x2 and has a blue iris

<a id="valsi-blanu"></a>blanublanu

x1 is blue \[color adjective\].

<a id="valsi-blariho"></a>blari'o

c1 is blue-green.

<a id="valsi-blaselkanla"></a>blaselkanla

x1 has blue eyes

<a id="valsi-blolei"></a>blolei

k1 is a ship type/class within ships b1\=k2, with features k3.

<a id="valsi-bloti"></a>blotibloti

x1 is a boat/ship/vessel \[vehicle\] for carrying x2, propelled by x3.

<a id="valsi-bo"></a>bo

short scope joiner; joins various constructs with shortest scope and right grouping.

<a id="valsi-boi"></a>boi

elidable terminator: terminate numeral or letteral string.

<a id="valsi-botpi"></a>botpibotpi

x1 is a bottle/jar/urn/flask/closable container for x2, made of material x3 with lid x4.

<a id="valsi-bradi"></a>bradibradi

x1 is an enemy/opponent/adversary/foe of x2 in struggle x3.

<a id="valsi-brazo"></a>brazobrazo

x1 reflects Brazilian culture/nationality/language in aspect x2.

<a id="valsi-bredi"></a>bredibredi

x1 is ready/prepared for x2 (event).

<a id="valsi-bridi"></a>bridibridi

x1 (du'u) is a predicate relationship with relation x2 among arguments (sequence/set) x3.

<a id="valsi-brife"></a>brifebrife

x1 is a breeze/wind/gale from direction x2 with speed x3; x1 blows from x2.

<a id="valsi-brito"></a>britobrito

x1 reflects British/United Kingdom culture/nationality in aspect x2.

<a id="valsi-brivla"></a>brivla

v1 is a morphologically defined predicate word signifying relation b2 in language v3.

<a id="valsi-broda"></a>brodabroda

1st assignable variable predicate (context determines place structure).

<a id="valsi-brode"></a>brodebrode

2nd assignable variable predicate (context determines place structure).

<a id="valsi-brodi"></a>brodibrodi

3rd assignable variable predicate (context determines place structure).

<a id="valsi-brodo"></a>brodobrodo

4th assignable variable predicate (context determines place structure).

<a id="valsi-brodu"></a>brodubrodu

5th assignable variable predicate (context determines place structure).

<a id="valsi-bu"></a>bu

convert any single word to BY.

<a id="valsi-budjo"></a>budjobudjo

x1 pertains to the Buddhist culture/religion/ethos in aspect x2.

<a id="valsi-buha"></a>bu'a

logically quantified predicate variable: some selbri 1.

<a id="valsi-buhe"></a>bu'e

logically quantified predicate variable: some selbri 2.

<a id="valsi-buhi"></a>bu'i

logically quantified predicate variable: some selbri 3.

<a id="valsi-buho"></a>bu'o

attitudinal contour: start emotion - continue emotion - end emotion.

<a id="valsi-buhocuhi"></a>bu'ocu'i

attitudinal contour: start emotion - continue emotion - end emotion.

<a id="valsi-buhonai"></a>bu'onai

attitudinal contour: start emotion - continue emotion - end emotion.

<a id="valsi-buhu"></a>bu'u

location tense relation/direction; coincident with/at the same place as; space equivalent of ca.

<a id="valsi-by"></a>by.

letteral for b.

<a id="valsi-by_by"></a>by.by.

letteral for BB

<a id="valsi-ca"></a>ca

time tense relation/direction: is \[selbri\]; during/simultaneous with \[sumti\]; present tense.

lei rirni pu zvati le barja .i ca bo lei verba cu kansa no da bu'u le zdani — The parents were in the bar; meanwhile the children were alone at home.

ko smaji ca le nu mi tavla — Be quite while I'm talking.

ca le nu do steba le nu do kansa no da zo'u ko morji le se gleki be mi'o mokca — When you feel frustrated about being lonely, remember the happy moments we had together.

mi pu prami do .i mi ca prami do .i mi ba prami do — I loved you. I love you. I will love you.

<a id="valsi-cabdei"></a>cabdei

d1\=c1 is today; d1\=c1 is the day occuring at the same time as c2, day standard d3.

<a id="valsi-cabna"></a>cabnacabna

x1 is current at/in the present of/during/concurrent/simultaneous with x2 in time.

<a id="valsi-cadzu"></a>cadzucadzu

x1 walks/strides/paces on surface x2 using limbs x3.

<a id="valsi-cafne"></a>cafnecafne

x1 (event) often/frequently/commonly/customarily occurs/recurs by standard x2.

<a id="valsi-cagycehu"></a>cagyce'u

x1 is a farming community with members x2.

<a id="valsi-caha"></a>ca'a

modal aspect: actuality/ongoing event.

<a id="valsi-cahe"></a>ca'e

evidential: I define.

<a id="valsi-caho"></a>ca'o

interval event contour: during ...; continuative |-----|.

<a id="valsi-cai"></a>cai

attitudinal: strong intensity attitude modifier.

<a id="valsi-cakcinki"></a>cakcinki

x1 is a beetle of species x2.

<a id="valsi-caku"></a>caku

Now. At the present time.

<a id="valsi-calku"></a>calkucalku

x1 is a shell/husk \[hard, protective covering\] around x2 composed of x3.

<a id="valsi-canci"></a>cancicanci

x1 vanishes/disappears from location x2; x1 ceases to be observed at x2 using senses/sensor x3.

<a id="valsi-canko"></a>cankocanko

x1 is a window/portal/opening \[portal\] in wall/building/structure x2.

<a id="valsi-canlu"></a>canlucanlu

x1 is space/volume/region/room \[at-least-3-dimensional area\] occupied by x2.

<a id="valsi-carmi"></a>carmicarmi

x1 is intense/bright/saturated/brilliant in property (ka) x2 as received/measured by observer x3.

<a id="valsi-carna"></a>carnacarna

x1 turns about vector x2 towards direction x3, turning angular distance / to face point x4

<a id="valsi-cartu"></a>cartucartu

x1 is a chart/diagram/map of/about x2 showing formation/data-points x3.

<a id="valsi-carvi"></a>carvicarvi

x1 rains/showers/\[precipitates\] to x2 from x3; x1 is precipitation \[not limited to 'rain'\].

<a id="valsi-casnu"></a>casnucasnu

x1(s) (mass normally, but 1 individual/jo'u possible) discuss(es)/talk(s) about topic/subject x2.

<a id="valsi-catlu"></a>catlucatlu

x1 looks at/examines/views/inspects/regards/watches/gazes at x2.

<a id="valsi-ce"></a>ce

non-logical connective: set link, unordered; "and also", but forming a set.

<a id="valsi-cedra"></a>cedracedra

x1 is an era/epoch/age characterized by x2 (event/property/interval/idea).

<a id="valsi-ceha"></a>ce'a

2-word letteral/shift: the word following indicates a new font (e.g. italics, manuscript).

<a id="valsi-cehe"></a>ce'e

links terms into an afterthought termset.

<a id="valsi-cehi"></a>ce'i

digit/number: % percentage symbol, hundredths.

<a id="valsi-ceho"></a>ce'o

non-logical connective: ordered sequence link; "and then", forming a sequence.

<a id="valsi-cehu"></a>ce'u

pseudo-quantifier binding a variable within an abstraction that represents an open place.

la .alis. la .an. cu zmadu le ka mi nelci ce'u — I like Alice more than Ann.

<a id="valsi-cei"></a>cei

selbri variable assignment; assigns broda series pro-bridi to a selbri.

<a id="valsi-censa"></a>censacensa

x1 is holy/sacred to person/people/culture/religion/cult/group x2.

<a id="valsi-centi"></a>centicenti

x1 is a hundredth \[1/100; 10\-2\] of x2 in dimension/aspect x3 (default is units).

<a id="valsi-cerni"></a>cernicerni

x1 is a morning \[dawn until after typical start-of-work for locale\] of day x2 at location x3.

<a id="valsi-certu"></a>certucertu

x1 is an expert/pro/has prowess in/is skilled at x2 (event/activity) by standard x3.

<a id="valsi-ci"></a>ci

digit/number: 3 (digit) \[three\].

<a id="valsi-ciblu"></a>cibluciblu

x1 is blood/vital fluid of organism x2.

<a id="valsi-cidja"></a>cidjacidja

x1 is food/feed/nutriment for x2; x1 is edible/gives nutrition to x2.

<a id="valsi-cidjrspageti"></a>cidjrspageti

x1 is a quantity of spaghetti (long, thin cylindrical pasta)

<a id="valsi-cidni"></a>cidnicidni

x1 is a/the knee/elbow/knuckle \[hinged joint, body-part\] of limb x2 of body x3.

<a id="valsi-cihajbu"></a>ci'ajbu

j1 is a writing desk of material j2, supported by legs/base/pedestal j3, used by writer c1.

<a id="valsi-cihe"></a>ci'ecihe

ciste modal, 1st place used in scalar negation in system/context ...

<a id="valsi-cihu"></a>ci'ucihu

ckilu modal, 1st place on the scale ...

<a id="valsi-cikna"></a>ciknacikna

(adjective:) x1 is awake/alert/conscious.

<a id="valsi-cilce"></a>cilcecilce

(adjective:) x1 is wild/untamed.

<a id="valsi-cilre"></a>cilrecilre

x1 learns x2 (du'u) about subject x3 from source x4 (obj./event) by method x5 (event/process).

<a id="valsi-cimoi"></a>cimoi

quantified selbri: convert 3 to ordinal selbri; x1 is third among x2 ordered by rule x3.

<a id="valsi-cinfo"></a>cinfocinfo

x1 is a lion/\[lioness\] of species/breed x2.

<a id="valsi-cinki"></a>cinkicinki

x1 is an insect/arthropod of species x2; \[bug/beetle\].

<a id="valsi-cinla"></a>cinlacinla

x1 is thin in direction/dimension x2 by standard x3; \[relatively short in smallest dimension\].

<a id="valsi-cipni"></a>cipnicipni

x1 is a bird/avian/fowl of species x2.

<a id="valsi-cipnrstrigi"></a>cipnrstrigi

x1 is an owl of species x2

<a id="valsi-cirla"></a>cirlacirla

x1 is a quantity of/contains cheese/curd from source x2.

<a id="valsi-ciska"></a>ciskaciska

x1 inscribes/writes x2 on display/storage medium x3 with writing implement x4; x1 is a scribe.

<a id="valsi-ciste"></a>cisteciste

x1 (mass) is a system interrelated by structure x2 among components x3 (set) displaying x4 (ka).

<a id="valsi-citka"></a>citkacitka

x1 eats/ingests/consumes (transitive verb) x2.

mi mo'u citka le pa badna .e le re plise — I've eaten a banana and two apples.

<a id="valsi-citmau"></a>citmau

z1\=c1 is younger than z2 by amount z4.

<a id="valsi-citno"></a>citnocitno

x1 is young/youthful \[relatively short in elapsed duration\] by standard x2.

<a id="valsi-cizra"></a>cizracizra

x1 is strange/weird/deviant/bizarre/odd to x2 in property x3 (ka).

le valsi cu cizra mi le ka se smuni ma kau — The word is strange to me in meaning.

cizra fa le nu la .tom. na zvati — It's strange that Tom is not present.

<a id="valsi-ckaji"></a>ckajickaji

x1 has/is characterized by property/feature/trait/aspect/dimension x2 (ka); x2 is manifest in x1.

<a id="valsi-ckiku"></a>ckikuckiku

x1 is a key fitting/releasing/opening/unlocking lock x2, and having relevant properties x3.

<a id="valsi-ckule"></a>ckuleckule

x1 is school/institute/academy at x2 teaching subject(s) x3 to audien./commun. x4 operated by x5.

<a id="valsi-cladakfu"></a>cladakfu

x1 is a long knife

<a id="valsi-cladakyxahi"></a>cladakyxa'i

x1\=d1\=c1 is a sword / long knife weapon for use against x2\=d2 by x3 with blade of material d3 long by standard c3.

<a id="valsi-cladu"></a>claducladu

x1 is loud/noisy at observation point x2 by standard x3.

<a id="valsi-clani"></a>claniclani

x1 is long in dimension/direction x2 (default longest dimension) by measurement standard x3.

<a id="valsi-clira"></a>cliraclira

x1 (event) is early by standard x2.

<a id="valsi-cliva"></a>clivacliva

x1 leaves/goes away/departs/parts/separates from x2 via route x3.

<a id="valsi-cmaci"></a>cmacicmaci

x1 is a mathematics of type/describing x2.

<a id="valsi-cmacma"></a>cmacma

c1 is tiny/miniature/diminutive/very small in property c2 with criterion c3.

<a id="valsi-cmalu"></a>cmalucmalu

x1 is small in property/dimension(s) x2 (ka) as compared with standard/norm x3.

<a id="valsi-cmana"></a>cmanacmana

x1 is a mountain/hill/mound/\[rise\]/\[peak\]/\[summit\]/\[highlands\] projecting from land mass x2.

<a id="valsi-cmarohi"></a>cmaro'i

c1\=r1 is a small rock of type r2 from location r3, small by standard c3. c1 is gravel.

<a id="valsi-cmavo"></a>cmavocmavo

x1 is a structure word of grammatical class x2, with meaning/function x3 in usage (language) x4.

<a id="valsi-cmene"></a>cmenecmene

x1 (quoted word(s)) is a/the name/title/tag of x2 to/used-by namer/name-user x3 (person).

ma cmene do — What is your name?

mi se cmene zo .bab. — My name is Bob.

le bruna be mi mi te cmene zo ractu — My brother calls me "Rabbit"

le kamni pu xusra le du'u le prenu pu zukte no le se cmene be lu na'e drani li'u bei le kamni — The committee asserted that the person had done nothing "incorrect" (quoting the committee's words).

<a id="valsi-cmevla"></a>cmevla

x1 is a morphologically defined name word meaning x2 in language x3.

<a id="valsi-cmima"></a>cmimacmima

x1 is a member/element of set x2; x1 belongs to group x2; x1 is amid/among/amongst group x2.

<a id="valsi-cnebo"></a>cnebocnebo

x1 is a/the neck \[body-part\] of x2; \[metaphor: a relatively narrow point\].

<a id="valsi-cnita"></a>cnitacnita

x1 is directly/vertically beneath/below/under/underneath/down from x2 in frame of reference x3.

<a id="valsi-co"></a>co

tanru inversion operator; "... of type ..."; allows modifier trailing sumti without sumti links.

<a id="valsi-coha"></a>co'a

interval event contour: at the starting point of ...; initiative >|< |.

pu co'a ru'i carvi — It started raining.

le plise co'a fusra — The apple has begun to decay.

co'a pelxu — It's turning yellow.

do pu co'a lazni — You became lazy.

<a id="valsi-cohe"></a>co'e

elliptical/unspecified bridi relationship.

mu'i ma do co'e mi — Why are you doing this to me?

za'o co'e — It's going on for too long.

.ei do troci le ka co'e bu'u lo drata — You should try it somewhere else.

<a id="valsi-cohi"></a>co'i

interval event contour: at the instantaneous point of ...; achievative/perfective; point event >|<.

<a id="valsi-coho"></a>co'o

vocative: partings/good-bye.

co'o le tumla pe mi — Goodbye, my land!

co'o ro do — Goodbye to all of you!

<a id="valsi-cohu"></a>co'u

interval event contour: at the ending point of ... even if not done; cessative | >< |.

<a id="valsi-coi"></a>coi

vocative: greetings/hello.

coi le munje — Hello, world!

coi ro do — Hello, everyone!

<a id="valsi-coicoho"></a>coico'o

vocative: greetings in passing.

<a id="valsi-condi"></a>condicondi

x1 is deep in extent in direction/property x2 away from reference point x3 by standard x4.

<a id="valsi-cpana"></a>cpanacpana

x1 is upon/atop/resting on/lying on \[the upper surface of\] x2 in frame of reference/gravity x3.

<a id="valsi-cpumihi"></a>cpumi'i

l1\=m1 is a tractor pulling l2.

<a id="valsi-crane"></a>cranecrane

x1 is anterior/ahead/forward/(in/on) the front of x2 which faces/in-frame-of-reference x3.

<a id="valsi-crepu"></a>crepucrepu

x1 (agent) harvests/reaps/gathers crop/product/objects x2 from source/area x3.

<a id="valsi-cribe"></a>cribecribe

x1 is a bear/ursoid of species/breed x2.

<a id="valsi-crino"></a>crinocrino

x1 is green/verdant \[color adjective\].

<a id="valsi-ctigau"></a>ctigau

g1 feeds c1 with food c2.

<a id="valsi-ctuca"></a>ctucactuca

x1 teaches audience x2 ideas/methods/lore x3 (du'u) about subject(s) x4 by method x5 (event).

<a id="valsi-cu"></a>cu

elidable marker: separates selbri from preceding sumti, allows preceding terminator elision.

lei rirni cu zvati ti ca — The parents are here now.

<a id="valsi-cuhe"></a>cu'e

tense/modal question.

<a id="valsi-cuhi"></a>cu'i

attitudinal: neutral scalar attitude modifier.

<a id="valsi-cuho"></a>cu'o

convert number to probability selbri; event x1 has probability (n) of occurring under cond. x2.

<a id="valsi-cuhu"></a>cu'ucuhu

cusku modal, 1st place (attribution/quotation) as said by source ...; used for quotation.

<a id="valsi-cukta"></a>cuktacukta

x1 is a book containing work x2 by author x3 for audience x4 preserved in medium x5.

<a id="valsi-culno"></a>culnoculno

x1 is full/completely filled with x2.

<a id="valsi-cumki"></a>cumkicumki

x1 (event/state/property) is possible under conditions x2; x1 may/might occur; x1 is a maybe.

cumki fa le nu la .alis. ba jai lerci — It's possible that Alice will be late.

<a id="valsi-cunso"></a>cunsocunso

x1 is random/fortuitous/unpredictable under conditions x2, with probability distribution x3.

<a id="valsi-cupra"></a>cupracupra

x1 produces x2 \[product\] by process x3.

<a id="valsi-curmi"></a>curmicurmi

x1 (agent) lets/permits/allows x2 (event) under conditions x3; x1 grants privilege x2.

<a id="valsi-cusku"></a>cusku

x1 (agent) expresses/says x2 (sedu'u/text/lu'e concept) for audience x3 via expressive medium x4.

ba ku mi cusku fi ra fe lu do mutce le ka xendo li'u — And then I said to her: "You are very kind."

do pu cusku le se du'u do ba gasnu le katna be le nanba — You said that you would cut the bread.

<a id="valsi-cutci"></a>cutcicutci

x1 is a shoe/boot/sandal for covering/protecting \[feet/hooves\] x2, and of material x3.

<a id="valsi-cuxna"></a>cuxnacuxna

x1 chooses/selects x2 \[choice\] from set/sequence of alternatives x3 (complete set).

<a id="valsi-cy"></a>cy.

letteral for c.

<a id="valsi-da"></a>da

logically quantified existential pro-sumti: there exists something 1 (usually restricted).

mi se bruna da — I have a brother.

<a id="valsi-dadgreku"></a>dadgreku

x1 is a rack used to hang x2.

<a id="valsi-dadjo"></a>dadjodadjo

x1 pertains to the Taoist culture/ethos/religion in aspect x2.

<a id="valsi-dadysli"></a>dadysli

s1\=d1 is a pendulum oscillating at rate/frequency s2, suspended from d2 by/at/with joint d3.

<a id="valsi-daha"></a>da'a

digit/number: all except n; all but n; default 1.

<a id="valsi-dahe"></a>da'e

pro-sumti: remote future utterance; "He'll tell you tomorrow. IT will be a doozy.".

<a id="valsi-dahi"></a>da'i

discursive: supposing - in fact.

da'i mi ricfu — I could be rich.

da'i nai mi se zdani le daplu — I do live on an island.

<a id="valsi-dahinai"></a>da'inai

discursive: supposing - in fact.

<a id="valsi-daho"></a>da'o

discursive: cancel pro-sumti/pro-bridi assignments.

<a id="valsi-dahu"></a>da'u

pro-sumti: a remote past utterance; "She couldn't have known that IT would be true.".

<a id="valsi-dai"></a>dai

attitudinal modifier: marks empathetic use of preceding attitudinal; shows another's feelings.

<a id="valsi-dakfu"></a>dakfudakfu

x1 is a knife (tool) for cutting x2, with blade of material x3.

<a id="valsi-dalmikce"></a>dalmikce

m1 is a doctor for animal m2\=d1 of species d2 for ailment m3 using treatment m4.

<a id="valsi-dandu"></a>dandudandu

x1 hangs/dangles/is suspended from x2 by/at/with joint x3.

<a id="valsi-danlu"></a>danludanlu

x1 is an animal/creature of species x2; x1 is biologically animate.

<a id="valsi-darsi"></a>darsidarsi

x1 shows audacity/chutzpah in behavior x2 (event/activity); x1 dares to do/be x2 (event/ka).

<a id="valsi-darvistci"></a>darvistci

t1 is a telescope for seeing v2\=d1 which is far from d2.

<a id="valsi-daski"></a>daskidaski

x1 is a pocket/pouch of/in garment/item x2.

<a id="valsi-dasni"></a>dasnidasni

x1 wears/is robed/garbed in x2 as a garment of type x3.

<a id="valsi-de"></a>de

logically quantified existential pro-sumti: there exists something 2 (usually restricted).

<a id="valsi-decti"></a>dectidecti

x1 is a tenth \[1/10; 10\-1\] of x2 in dimension/aspect x3 (default is units).

<a id="valsi-degji"></a>degjidegji

x1 is a/the finger/digit/toe \[body-part\] on limb/body site x2 of body x3; \[metaphor: peninsula\].

<a id="valsi-degygutci"></a>degygutci

g1 is g2 inch/inches (length unit).

<a id="valsi-deha"></a>de'a

event contour for a temporary halt and ensuing pause in a process.

<a id="valsi-dehe"></a>de'e

pro-sumti: a near future utterance.

<a id="valsi-dehi"></a>de'idehi

detri modal, 1st place (for letters) dated ... ; attaches date stamp.

<a id="valsi-dehu"></a>de'u

pro-sumti: a recent utterance.

<a id="valsi-dei"></a>dei

pro-sumti: this utterance.

<a id="valsi-dejni"></a>dejnidejni

x1 owes x2 in debt/obligation to creditor x3 in return for x4 \[service, loan\]; x1 is a debtor.

<a id="valsi-dekto"></a>dektodekto

x1 is ten \[10; 101 \] of x2 in dimension/aspect x3 (default is units).

<a id="valsi-delno"></a>delnodelno

x1 is x2 candela \[metric unit\] in luminosity (default is 1) by standard x3.

<a id="valsi-denci"></a>dencidenci

x1 is a/the tooth \[body-part\] of x2; (adjective:) x1 is dental.

<a id="valsi-denpa"></a>denpadenpa

x1 awaits/waits/pauses for/until x2 at state x3 before starting/continuing x4 (activity/process).

<a id="valsi-dertu"></a>dertudertu

x1 is a quantity of/contains/is made of dirt/soil/earth/ground from source x2 of composition x3.

<a id="valsi-derxi"></a>derxiderxi

x1 is a heap/pile/stack/mound/hill of materials x2 at location x3.

<a id="valsi-di"></a>di

logically quantified existential pro-sumti: there exists something 3 (usually restricted).

<a id="valsi-diha"></a>di'a

event contour for resumption of a paused process.

<a id="valsi-dihe"></a>di'e

pro-sumti: the next utterance.

<a id="valsi-dihi"></a>di'i

tense interval modifier: regularly; subjective tense/modal; defaults as time tense.

<a id="valsi-dihinai"></a>di'inai

tense interval modifier: irregularly/aperiodically; tense/modal; defaults as time tense.

<a id="valsi-dihu"></a>di'u

pro-sumti: the last utterance.

<a id="valsi-dinju"></a>dinjudinju

x1 is a building/edifice for purpose x2.

<a id="valsi-dirba"></a>dirbadirba

x1 is dear/precious/darling to x2; x1 is emotionally valued by x2.

<a id="valsi-dirce"></a>dircedirce

x1 radiates/emits x2 under conditions x3.

<a id="valsi-dizlo"></a>dizlodizlo

x1 is low/down/downward in frame of reference x2 as compared with baseline/standard height x3.

<a id="valsi-djedi"></a>djedidjedi

x1 is x2 full days in duration (default is 1 day) by standard x3; (adjective:) x1 is diurnal.

<a id="valsi-djica"></a>djicadjica

x1 desires/wants/wishes x2 (event/state) for purpose x3.

mi djica le nu mi cusku le xajmi vau le nu do cisma — I want to tell something funny to make you smile.

mi djica tu'a le plise — I want the apples.

mi djica le nu do smadi — I want you to guess.

<a id="valsi-djine"></a>djinedjine

x1 is a ring/annulus/torus/circle \[shape/form\] of material x2, inside diam. x3, outside diam. x4.

<a id="valsi-djuno"></a>djunodjuno

x1 knows fact(s) x2 (du'u) about subject x3 by epistemology x4.

mi djuno le du'u mi zasti vau fo le du'u mi pensi — I know that I exist since I think.

<a id="valsi-do"></a>do

pro-sumti: you listener(s); identified by vocative.

xu do djica le nu mi sidju do — Do you want me to help you?

<a id="valsi-doha"></a>do'a

discursive: generously - parsimoniously.

<a id="valsi-dohanai"></a>do'anai

discursive: generously - parsimoniously.

<a id="valsi-dohe"></a>do'edohe

elliptical/unspecified modal.

<a id="valsi-dohi"></a>do'i

pro-sumti: elliptical/unspecified utterance variable.

<a id="valsi-doho"></a>do'o

pro-sumti: you the listener & others unspecified.

<a id="valsi-dohu"></a>do'u

elidable terminator: end vocative (often elidable).

<a id="valsi-doi"></a>doi

generic vocative marker; identifies intended listener; elidable after COI.

doi le nobli do co'u morji fi le ckiku pe do — Oh, sir! You forgot your keys.

<a id="valsi-donmaho"></a>donma'o

c1 is a second person pronoun in language c4.

<a id="valsi-donri"></a>donridonri

x1 is the daytime of day x2 at location x3; (adjective:) x1 is diurnal (vs. nocturnal).

<a id="valsi-dontaha"></a>donta'a

x1 talks to you (i.e. whoever x1 is addressing) about x2 in language x3

<a id="valsi-dotco"></a>dotcodotco

x1 reflects German/Germanic culture/nationality/language in aspect x2.

<a id="valsi-drani"></a>dranidrani

x1 is correct/proper/right/perfect in property/aspect x2 (ka) in situation x3 by standard x4.

<a id="valsi-drata"></a>dratadrata

x1 isn't the-same-thing-as/is different-from/other-than x2 by standard x3; x1 is something else.

<a id="valsi-drudi"></a>drudidrudi

x1 is a roof/top/ceiling/lid of x2.

<a id="valsi-du"></a>du

identity selbri; = sign; x1 identically equals x2, x3, etc.; attached sumti refer to same thing.

<a id="valsi-dubjavmau"></a>dubjavmau

x1 is greater than or equal to x2.

<a id="valsi-dubjavmeha"></a>dubjavme'a

x1 is less than or equal to x2

<a id="valsi-duhe"></a>du'e

digit/number: too many; subjective.

<a id="valsi-duhi"></a>du'iduhi

dunli modal, 1st place (equalled by) equally; as much as ...

<a id="valsi-duhu"></a>du'u

abstractor: predication/bridi abstractor; x1 is predication \[bridi\] expressed in sentence x2.

mi djuno le du'u do na fuzme — I know that you are not responsible.

<a id="valsi-dunda"></a>dundadunda

x1 \[donor\] gives/donates gift/present x2 to recipient/beneficiary x3 \[without payment/exchange\].

<a id="valsi-dunli"></a>dunlidunli

x1 is equal/congruent to/as much as x2 in property/dimension/quantity x3.

<a id="valsi-dy"></a>dy.

letteral for d.

<a id="valsi-dzipo"></a>dzipodzipo

x1 reflects Antarctican culture/nationality/geography in aspect x2.

<a id="valsi-dzukla"></a>dzukla

c1\=k1 walks to k2 from k3 via route k4 using limbs k5\=c3 on surface c2

<a id="valsi-e"></a>.e

logical connective: sumti afterthought and.

<a id="valsi-ebu"></a>.ebu

letteral for e.

<a id="valsi-eha"></a>.e'a

attitudinal: granting permission - prohibiting.

<a id="valsi-ehe"></a>.e'e

attitudinal: competence - incompetence/inability.

<a id="valsi-eho"></a>.e'o

attitudinal: request - negative request.

<a id="valsi-ehu"></a>.e'u

attitudinal: suggestion - abandon suggest - warning.

<a id="valsi-ei"></a>.ei

attitudinal: obligation - freedom.

<a id="valsi-fa"></a>fa

sumti place tag: tag 1st sumti place.

fe zo coi cusku fa mi — Hello, said I.

fe ma fa mi zukte .ei — What should I do?

sarcu fa le nu do zvati — It's required that you are present.

<a id="valsi-facki"></a>fackifacki

x1 discovers/finds out x2 (du'u) about subject/object x3; x1 finds (fi) x3 (object).

<a id="valsi-fadni"></a>fadnifadni

x1 \[member\] is ordinary/common/typical/usual in property x2 (ka) among members of x3 (set).

<a id="valsi-fagri"></a>fagrifagri

x1 is a fire/flame in fuel x2 burning-in/reacting-with oxidizer x3 (default air/oxygen).

<a id="valsi-fagyfesti"></a>fagyfesti

x1\=fe1 is the ashes of x3\=fa2, combusted by fire x2\=fa1.

<a id="valsi-faha"></a>fa'a

location tense relation/direction; arriving at/directly towards ...

<a id="valsi-faho"></a>fa'o

unconditional end of text; outside regular grammar; used for computer input.

<a id="valsi-fahu"></a>fa'u

non-logical connective: respectively; unmixed ordered distributed association.

<a id="valsi-fai"></a>fai

sumti place tag: tag a sumti moved out of numbered place structure; used in modal conversions.

<a id="valsi-fanmo"></a>fanmofanmo

x1 is an end/finish/termination of thing/process x2; \[not necessarily implying completeness\].

<a id="valsi-fanza"></a>fanzafanza

x1 (event) annoys/irritates/bothers/distracts x2.

<a id="valsi-farlu"></a>farlufarlu

x1 falls/drops to x2 from x3 in gravity well/frame of reference x4.

<a id="valsi-fasnu"></a>fasnufasnu

x1 (event) is an event that happens/occurs/takes place; x1 is an incident/happening/occurrence.

<a id="valsi-fau"></a>faufau

fasnu modal, 1st place (non-causal) in the event of ...

<a id="valsi-fe"></a>fe

sumti place tag: tag 2nd sumti place.

<a id="valsi-feha"></a>fe'a

binary mathematical operator: nth root of; inverse power \[a to the 1/b power\].

<a id="valsi-fehe"></a>fe'e

mark space interval distributive aspects; labels interval tense modifiers as location-oriented.

<a id="valsi-feho"></a>fe'o

vocative: over and out (end discussion).

<a id="valsi-fehu"></a>fe'u

elidable terminator: end nonce conversion of selbri to modal; usually elidable.

<a id="valsi-femti"></a>femtifemti

x1 is 10\-15 of x2 in dimension/aspect x3 (default is units).

<a id="valsi-ferti"></a>fertiferti

x1 is fertile/conducive for supporting the growth/development of x2; x1 is fruitful/prolific.

<a id="valsi-festi"></a>festifesti

x1(s) is/are waste product(s) \[left to waste\] by x2 (event/activity).

<a id="valsi-fi"></a>fi

sumti place tag: tag 3rd sumti place.

mi dunda fe tu'a ti fi do — I give this to you.

mi co'i klama fi le tsani — I came from the sky.

<a id="valsi-fiha"></a>fi'a

sumti place tag: place structure number/tag question.

<a id="valsi-fihe"></a>fi'efihe

finti modal, 1st place (creator) created by ...

<a id="valsi-fihi"></a>fi'i

vocative: hospitality - inhospitality; you are welcome/ make yourself at home.

<a id="valsi-fiho"></a>fi'o

convert selbri to nonce modal/sumti tag.

<a id="valsi-fihu"></a>fi'u

digit/number: fraction slash; default "/n" => 1/n, "n/" => n/1, or "/" alone => golden ratio.

<a id="valsi-filso"></a>filsofilso

x1 reflects Palestinian culture/nationality in aspect x2.

<a id="valsi-finpe"></a>finpefinpe

x1 is a fish of species x2 \[metaphorical extension to sharks, non-fish aquatic vertebrates\].

<a id="valsi-finti"></a>fintifinti

x1 invents/creates/composes/authors x2 for function/purpose x3 from existing elements/ideas x4.

mi pu finti le lisri le ka zdile le verba vau le se lifri be mi — I created a story out of my real experience to amuse the child.

<a id="valsi-firgai"></a>firgai

g1 is a mask covering the face of g2\=f2.

<a id="valsi-flalu"></a>flaluflalu

x1 is a law specifying x2 (state/event) for community x3 under conditions x4 by lawgiver(s) x5.

<a id="valsi-flaume"></a>flaume

x1 is a plum of variety x2.

<a id="valsi-flecu"></a>flecuflecu

x1 is a current/flow/river of/in x2 flowing in direction to/towards x3 from direction/source x4.

<a id="valsi-fo"></a>fo

sumti place tag: tag 4th sumti place.

<a id="valsi-foha"></a>fo'a

pro-sumti: he/she/it/they #6 (specified by goi).

<a id="valsi-fohe"></a>fo'e

pro-sumti: he/she/it/they #7 (specified by goi).

<a id="valsi-fohi"></a>fo'i

pro-sumti: he/she/it/they #8 (specified by goi).

<a id="valsi-foho"></a>fo'o

pro-sumti: he/she/it/they #9 (specified by goi).

<a id="valsi-fohu"></a>fo'u

pro-sumti: he/she/it/they #10 (specified by goi).

<a id="valsi-foi"></a>foi

terminator: end composite lerfu; never elidable.

<a id="valsi-foldi"></a>foldifoldi

x1 is a field \[shape/form\] of material x2; x1 is a broad uniform expanse of x2.

<a id="valsi-fraso"></a>frasofraso

x1 reflects French/Gallic culture/nationality/language in aspect x2.

<a id="valsi-friko"></a>frikofriko

x1 reflects African culture/nationality/geography in aspect x2.

<a id="valsi-frinu"></a>frinufrinu

x1 is a fraction, with numerator x2, denominator x3 (x2/x3).

<a id="valsi-fu"></a>fu

sumti place tag: tag 5th sumti place.

<a id="valsi-fuha"></a>fu'a

reverse Polish mathematical expression (mex) operator flag.

<a id="valsi-fuhe"></a>fu'e

begin indicator long scope.

<a id="valsi-fuhi"></a>fu'i

attitudinal modifier: easy - difficult.

<a id="valsi-fuhivla"></a>fu'ivla

x1\=v1\=f1 is a loanword meaning x2\=v2 in language x3\=v3, based on word x4\=f2 in language x5.

<a id="valsi-fuho"></a>fu'o

end indicator long scope; terminates scope of all active indicators.

<a id="valsi-fy"></a>fy.

letteral for f.

<a id="valsi-ga"></a>ga

logical connective: forethought all but tanru-internal or (with gi).

<a id="valsi-gadri"></a>gadrigadri

x1 is an article/descriptor labelling description x2 (text) in language x3 with semantics x4.

<a id="valsi-gahe"></a>ga'e

upper-case letteral shift.

<a id="valsi-gahi"></a>ga'i

attitudinal modifier/honorific: hauteur - equal rank - meekness; used with one of lower rank.

<a id="valsi-gahicuhi"></a>ga'icu'i

attitudinal modifier/honorific: hauteur - equal rank - meekness; used with one of equal rank.

<a id="valsi-gahinai"></a>ga'inai

attitudinal modifier/honorific: hauteur - equal rank - meekness; used with one of higher rank.

<a id="valsi-gaho"></a>ga'o

closed interval bracket marker; mod. intervals in non-logical connectives; include boundaries.

<a id="valsi-gahu"></a>ga'u

location tense relation/direction; upwards/up from ...

<a id="valsi-galfi"></a>galfigalfi

x1 (event) modifies/alters/changes/transforms/converts x2 into x3.

<a id="valsi-galtu"></a>galtugaltu

x1 is high/up/upward in frame of reference x2 as compared with baseline/standard height x3.

<a id="valsi-ganai"></a>ganai

logical connective: forethought all but tanru-internal conditional/only if (with gi).

<a id="valsi-ganlo"></a>ganloganlo

x1 (portal/passage/entrance-way) is closed/shut/not open, preventing passage/access to x2 by x3 (something being blocked).

<a id="valsi-ganse"></a>ganseganse

x1 \[observer\] senses/detects/notices stimulus x2 (object/nu) by means x3 under conditions x4.

<a id="valsi-gapru"></a>gaprugapru

x1 is directly/vertically above/upwards-from x2 in gravity/frame of reference x3.

<a id="valsi-gaskre"></a>gaskre

k1\=g3 is a/are the whisker(s)/sensory hair(s) /vibrissa(e) attached to k2\=g1 at body part k3 for the detection of stimuli g2 under conditions g4.

<a id="valsi-gasnu"></a>gasnugasnu

x1 \[person/agent\] is an agentive cause of event x2; x1 does/brings about x2.

<a id="valsi-gau"></a>gaugau

gasnu modal, 1st place agent/actor case tag with active agent ...

<a id="valsi-ge"></a>ge

logical connective: forethought all but tanru-internal and (with gi).

<a id="valsi-geha"></a>ge'a

mathematical operator: null mathematical expression (mex) operator (used in >2-ary ops).

<a id="valsi-gehe"></a>ge'e

attitudinal: elliptical/unspecified/non-specific emotion; no particular feeling.

<a id="valsi-gehi"></a>ge'i

logical connective: forethought all but tanru-internal connective question (with gi).

<a id="valsi-geho"></a>ge'o

shift letterals to Greek alphabet.

<a id="valsi-gehu"></a>ge'u

elidable terminator: end GOI relative phrases; usually elidable in non-complex phrases.

<a id="valsi-gei"></a>gei

trinary mathematical operator: order of magnitude/value/base; \[b \* (c to the a power)\].

<a id="valsi-gekmau"></a>gekmau

x1 is happier than x2 about x3 by amount x4

<a id="valsi-gento"></a>gentogento

x1 reflects Argentinian culture/nationality in aspect x2.

<a id="valsi-genxu"></a>genxugenxu

x1 is a hook/crook \[shape/form\] of material x2.

<a id="valsi-gerku"></a>gerkugerku

x1 is a dog/canine/\[bitch\] of species/breed x2.

<a id="valsi-gerzda"></a>gerzda

z1 is a doghouse for dog z2\=g1.

<a id="valsi-gi"></a>gi

logical connective: all but tanru-internal forethought connective medial marker.

ge do gi mi nelci le'e perli — Both you and I like pears.

<a id="valsi-gidva"></a>gidvagidva

x1 (person/object/event) guides/conducts/pilots/leads x2 (active participants) in/at x3 (event).

<a id="valsi-gigdo"></a>gigdogigdo

x1 is a billion \[British milliard\] \[109\] of x2 in dimension/aspect x3 (default is units).

<a id="valsi-giha"></a>gi'a

logical connective: bridi-tail afterthought or.

<a id="valsi-gihe"></a>gi'e

logical connective: bridi-tail afterthought and.

.ai mi lumci le kumfa gi'e jukpa le nanba — I'm going to clean the room and cook bread.

<a id="valsi-gihi"></a>gi'i

logical connective: bridi-tail afterthought conn question.

<a id="valsi-giho"></a>gi'o

logical connective: bridi-tail afterthought biconditional/iff/if-and-only-if.

<a id="valsi-gihu"></a>gi'u

logical connective: bridi-tail afterthought whether-or-not.

<a id="valsi-girzu"></a>girzugirzu

x1 is group/cluster/team showing common property (ka) x2 due to set x3 linked by relations x4.

<a id="valsi-gismu"></a>gismugismu

x1 is a (Lojban) root word expressing relation x2 among argument roles x3, with affix(es) x4.

<a id="valsi-glare"></a>glareglare

x1 is hot/\[warm\] by standard x2.

<a id="valsi-gleki"></a>glekigleki

x1 is happy/merry/glad/gleeful about x2 (event/state).

mi gleki le nu do jinga — I am happy that you won.

<a id="valsi-glico"></a>glicoglico

x1 is English/pertains to English-speaking culture in aspect x2.

<a id="valsi-go"></a>go

logical connective: forethought all but tanru internal biconditional/iff/if-and-only-if(with gi).

<a id="valsi-gocti"></a>goctigocti

x1 is 10\-24 of x2 in dimension/aspect x3 (default is units).

<a id="valsi-goha"></a>go'a

pro-bridi: repeats a recent bridi (usually not the last 2).

<a id="valsi-gohe"></a>go'e

pro-bridi: repeats the next to last bridi.

<a id="valsi-gohi"></a>go'i

pro-bridi: preceding bridi; in answer to a yes/no question, repeats the claim, meaning yes.

.au mi penmi do .i xu le nu go'i cu cumki — I'd like to meet you. Is this possible?

<a id="valsi-goho"></a>go'o

pro-bridi: repeats a future bridi, normally the next one.

<a id="valsi-gohu"></a>go'u

pro-bridi: repeats a remote past bridi.

<a id="valsi-goi"></a>goi

sumti assignment; used to define/assign ko'a/fo'a series pro-sumti; Latin 'sive'.

<a id="valsi-gotro"></a>gotrogotro

x1 is 1024 of x2 in dimension/aspect x3 (default is units).

<a id="valsi-grana"></a>granagrana

x1 is a rod/pole/staff/stick/cane \[shape/form\] of material x2.

<a id="valsi-grutrxananase"></a>grutrxananase

x1 is a pineapple of species/variety x2.

<a id="valsi-gu"></a>gu

logical connective: forethought all but tanru-internal whether-or-not (with gi).

<a id="valsi-gugde"></a>gugdegugde

x1 is the country of peoples x2 with land/territory x3; (people/territory relationship).

<a id="valsi-guha"></a>gu'a

logical connective: tanru-internal forethought or (with gi).

<a id="valsi-guhe"></a>gu'e

logical connective: tanru-internal forethought and (with gi).

<a id="valsi-guhi"></a>gu'i

logical connective: tanru-internal forethought question (with gi).

<a id="valsi-guho"></a>gu'o

logical connective: tanru-internal forethought biconditional/iff/if-and-only-if (with gi).

<a id="valsi-guhu"></a>gu'u

logical connective: tanru-internal forethought whether-or-not (with gi).

<a id="valsi-gundi"></a>gundigundi

x1 is industry/industrial/systematic manufacturing activity producing x2 by process/means x3.

<a id="valsi-gunse"></a>gunsegunse

x1 is a goose/\[gander\] of species/breed x2.

<a id="valsi-gusni"></a>gusnigusni

x1 \[energy\] is light/illumination illuminating x2 from light source x3.

<a id="valsi-gy"></a>gy.

letteral for g.

<a id="valsi-i"></a>.i

sentence link/continuation; continuing sentences on same topic; normally elided for new speakers.

<a id="valsi-ia"></a>.ia

attitudinal: belief - skepticism - disbelief.

<a id="valsi-ianai"></a>.ianai

attitudinal: belief - skepticism - disbelief.

<a id="valsi-ibabo"></a>.ibabo

And after that ...

<a id="valsi-ibazabo"></a>.ibazabo

And after a while after that ...

<a id="valsi-ibazibo"></a>.ibazibo

And soon after that ...

<a id="valsi-ibu"></a>.ibu

letteral for i.

<a id="valsi-icabo"></a>.icabo

And at the same time ...

<a id="valsi-ie"></a>.ie

attitudinal: agreement - disagreement.

<a id="valsi-ienai"></a>.ienai

attitudinal: agreement - disagreement.

<a id="valsi-iesai"></a>.iesai

attitudinal: "I fully agree"

<a id="valsi-iha"></a>.i'a

attitudinal: acceptance - blame.

<a id="valsi-ihe"></a>.i'e

attitudinal: approval - non-approval - disapproval.

<a id="valsi-ihinai"></a>.i'inai

attitudinal: togetherness - privacy.

<a id="valsi-ii"></a>.ii

attitudinal: fear - security.

<a id="valsi-iicai"></a>.iicai

attitudinal: "Eek!"; utmost fear

<a id="valsi-ija"></a>.ija

logical connective: sentence afterthought or.

<a id="valsi-ijahebo"></a>.ija'ebo

And as the result ...

<a id="valsi-ije"></a>.ije

logical connective: sentence afterthought and.

<a id="valsi-ikihubo"></a>.iki'ubo

And it's true or happens because of the reason ...

<a id="valsi-inihibo"></a>.ini'ibo

And it is logically because of ...

<a id="valsi-io"></a>.io

attitudinal: respect - disrespect.

<a id="valsi-iseju"></a>.iseju

whether or not that is tor happens rue it's true or happens that ...

<a id="valsi-isekihubo"></a>.iseki'ubo

And because of that reasonit's true or happens that ...

<a id="valsi-isemuhibo"></a>.isemu'ibo

And that is the motive for the event ...

<a id="valsi-iu"></a>.iu

attitudinal: love - no love lost - hatred.

<a id="valsi-ja"></a>ja

logical connective: tanru-internal afterthought or.

<a id="valsi-jaha"></a>ja'a

bridi logical affirmer; scope is an entire bridi.

<a id="valsi-jahe"></a>ja'ejahe

jalge modal, 1st place resultingly; therefore result ...

<a id="valsi-jaho"></a>ja'o

evidential: I conclude.

<a id="valsi-jai"></a>jai

convert tense/modal (tagged) place to 1st place; 1st place moves to extra FA place (fai).

lei ckiku cu jai nandu fai le nu ri se zva-fa'i .i va'i le nu zva-fa'i lei ckiku cu nandu — The keys are hard to find. In other words, to find the keys is difficult.

le'e bangu cu jai nandu .i le'e bangu cu jai nandu fai le nu cilre fi ri — Languages are difficult. Languages are difficult in learning things about them.

ko cusku le jai se djica be do — Say what you want.

do ro roi cusku su'o da poi nandu fa le nu jimpe fi ke'a — You always say something hard to understand.

<a id="valsi-jalge"></a>jalgejalge

x1 (action/event/state) is a result/outcome/conclusion of antecedent x2 (event/state/process).

<a id="valsi-jamfu"></a>jamfujamfu

x1 is a/the foot \[body-part\] of x2; \[metaphor: lowest portion\] (adjective:) x1 is pedal.

<a id="valsi-jamna"></a>jamnajamna

x1 (person/mass) wars against x2 over territory/matter x3; x1 is at war with x2.

<a id="valsi-janco"></a>jancojanco

x1 is a/the shoulder/hip/joint \[body-part\] attaching limb/extremity x2 to body x3.

<a id="valsi-jarco"></a>jarcojarco

x1 (agent) shows/exhibits/displays/\[reveals\]/demonstrates x2 (property) to audience x3.

<a id="valsi-javni"></a>javnijavni

x1 is a rule prescribing/mandating/requiring x2 (event/state) within system/community x3.

<a id="valsi-jbena"></a>jbenajbena

x1 is born to x2 at time x3 \[birthday\] and place x4 \[birthplace\]; x1 is native to (fo) x4.

<a id="valsi-jbini"></a>jbinijbini

x1 is between/among set of points/bounds/limits x2 (set)/amidst mass x2 in property x3 (ka).

<a id="valsi-jdari"></a>jdarijdari

x1 is firm/hard/resistant/unyielding to force x2 under conditions x3.

<a id="valsi-jdaselsku"></a>jdaselsku

c2 is a prayer of believer c1\=l2 for deity c3 in medium c4 according to religion l3.

<a id="valsi-jdice"></a>jdicejdice

x1 (person) decides/makes decision x2 (du'u) about matter x3 (event/state).

<a id="valsi-jdika"></a>jdikajdika

x1 (experiencer) decreases/contracts/is reduced/diminished in property/quantity x2 by amount x3.

<a id="valsi-jduli"></a>jdulijduli

x1 is a quantity of jelly/semisolid \[texture\] of material/composition including x2.

<a id="valsi-je"></a>je

logical connective: tanru-internal afterthought and.

do pu je ca je ba pendo mi — You were, are and will be my friend.

<a id="valsi-jegvo"></a>jegvojegvo

x1 pertains to the common Judeo-Christian-Moslem (Abrahamic) culture/religion/nationality in aspect x2.

<a id="valsi-jeha"></a>je'a

scalar affirmer; denies scalar negation: Indeed!.

<a id="valsi-jehe"></a>je'e

vocative: roger (ack) - negative acknowledge; used to acknowledge offers and thanks.

lu ki'e do li'u lu je'e do li'u — "Thank you!" "You are welcome!"

<a id="valsi-jehenai"></a>je'enai

vocative: roger (ack) - negative acknowledge; I didn't hear you.

<a id="valsi-jehi"></a>je'i

logical connective: tanru-internal afterthought conn question.

<a id="valsi-jeho"></a>je'o

shift letterals to Hebrew alphabet.

<a id="valsi-jehu"></a>je'u

discursive: truth - falsity.

<a id="valsi-jehunai"></a>je'unai

discursive: truth - falsity.

<a id="valsi-jei"></a>jei

abstractor: truth-value abstractor; x1 is truth value of \[bridi\] under epistemology x2.

<a id="valsi-jelca"></a>jelcajelca

x1 burns/\[ignites/is flammable/inflammable\] at temperature x2 in atmosphere x3.

<a id="valsi-jenai"></a>jenai

logical connective: tanru-internal afterthought x but not y.

<a id="valsi-jersi"></a>jersijersi

x1 chases/pursues/(physically) follows after x2; volition is not implied for x1 or x2.

<a id="valsi-jerxo"></a>jerxojerxo

x1 reflects Algerian culture/nationality in aspect x2.

<a id="valsi-jetce"></a>jetcejetce

x1 is a jet \[expelled stream\] of material x2 expelled from x3.

<a id="valsi-jetnu"></a>jetnujetnu

x1 (du'u) is true/truth by standard/epistemology/metaphysics x2.

<a id="valsi-jgari"></a>jgarijgari

x1 grasps/holds/clutches/seizes/grips/\[hugs\] x2 with x3 (part of x1) at locus x4 (part of x2).

<a id="valsi-ji"></a>ji

logical connective: sumti afterthought connective question.

<a id="valsi-jibni"></a>jibnijibni

x1 is near/close to/approximates x2 in property/quantity x3 (ka/ni).

<a id="valsi-jiha"></a>ji'a

discursive: additionally.

mi ji'a je'a nelci — I like it too.

lo'e xagji cribe cu citka lo'e cinki ku ji'a sai — A hungry bear will eat even insects.

ji'a mi pu citka le'e titla — Additionally, I ate the sweet.

mi pu citka le titla ji'a — I ate what is additionally a sweet.

mi pu citka le ji'a titla — I eat the sweet among other things.

<a id="valsi-jihasai"></a>ji'asai

even

<a id="valsi-jihi"></a>ji'i

digit/number: approximately (default the typical value in this context) (number).

<a id="valsi-jihu"></a>ji'ujihu

jicmu modal, 1st place (assumptions); given that ...; based on ...

<a id="valsi-jinto"></a>jintojinto

x1 is a well/spring of fluid x2 at location x3.

<a id="valsi-jinvi"></a>jinvijinvi

x1 thinks/opines x2 \[opinion\] (du'u) is true about subject/issue x3 on grounds x4.

<a id="valsi-jitro"></a>jitrojitro

x1 has control over/harnesses/manages/directs/conducts x2 in x3 (activity/event/performance).

<a id="valsi-jo"></a>jo

logical connective: tanru-internal afterthought biconditional/iff/if-and-only-if.

<a id="valsi-joha"></a>jo'a

discursive: metalinguistic affirmer.

<a id="valsi-johe"></a>jo'e

non-logical connective: union of sets.

<a id="valsi-johi"></a>jo'i

join mathematical expression (mex) operands into an array.

<a id="valsi-joho"></a>jo'o

shift letterals to Arabic alphabet.

<a id="valsi-johu"></a>jo'u

non-logical connective: in common with; along with (unmixed).

<a id="valsi-joi"></a>joi

non-logical connective: mixed conjunction; "and" meaning "mixed together", forming a mass.

<a id="valsi-jordo"></a>jordojordo

x1 reflects Jordanian culture/nationality in aspect x2.

<a id="valsi-ju"></a>ju

logical connective: tanru-internal afterthought whether-or-not.

<a id="valsi-jubme"></a>jubmejubme

x1 is a table/flat solid upper surface of material x2, supported by legs/base/pedestal x3.

<a id="valsi-juha"></a>ju'a

evidential: I state - (default) elliptical/non-specific basis.

<a id="valsi-juhi"></a>ju'i

vocative: attention - at ease - ignore me.

<a id="valsi-juho"></a>ju'o

attitudinal modifier: certainty - uncertainty - impossibility.

<a id="valsi-juhu"></a>ju'u

binary mathematical operator: number base; \[a interpreted in the base b\].

<a id="valsi-jukpa"></a>jukpajukpa

x1 cooks/prepares food-for-eating x2 by recipe/method x3 (process).

<a id="valsi-jundi"></a>jundijundi

x1 is attentive towards/attends/tends/pays attention to object/affair x2.

<a id="valsi-jungo"></a>jungojungo

x1 reflects Chinese \[Mandarin, Cantonese, Wu, etc.\] culture/nationality/language in aspect x2.

<a id="valsi-junla"></a>junlajunla

x1 is clock/watch/timer measuring time units x2 to precision x3 with timing mechanism/method x4.

<a id="valsi-jy"></a>jy.

letteral for j.

<a id="valsi-ka"></a>ka

abstractor: property/quality abstractor (-ness); x1 is quality/property exhibited by \[bridi\].

ta'i ku do ba cirko le ka sinma ce'u — This way you will lose respect.

<a id="valsi-kabri"></a>kabrikabri

x1 is a cup/glass/tumbler/mug/vessel/\[bowl\] containing contents x2, and of material x3.

<a id="valsi-kadno"></a>kadnokadno

x1 reflects Canadian culture/nationality in aspect x2.

<a id="valsi-kaha"></a>ka'akaha

klama modal, 1st place gone to by ...

<a id="valsi-kahe"></a>ka'e

modal aspect: innate capability; possibly unrealized.

ro da ka'e te tavla — Everything can be talked about.

<a id="valsi-kaho"></a>ka'o

digit/number: imaginary i; square root of -1.

<a id="valsi-kahu"></a>ka'u

evidential: I know by cultural means (myth or custom).

<a id="valsi-kai"></a>kaikai

ckaji modal, 1st place characterizing ...

<a id="valsi-kajna"></a>kajnakajna

x1 is a shelf/counter/bar in/on/attached to supporting object x2, for purpose x3.

<a id="valsi-kakne"></a>kaknekakne

x1 is able to do/be/capable of doing/being x2 (event/state) under conditions x3 (event/state).

mi na kakne le nu sipna — I can't sleep.

<a id="valsi-kalri"></a>kalrikalri

x1 (portal/passage/entrance-way) is open/ajar/not shut permitting passage/access to x2 by x3.

<a id="valsi-kalselvihi"></a>kalselvi'i

x1\=v2 is a tear/tear fluid of x2\=v1.

<a id="valsi-kambla"></a>kambla

x1 is blueness

<a id="valsi-kanji"></a>kanjikanji

x1 calculates/reckons/computes x2 \[value (ni)/state\] from data x3 by process x4.

<a id="valsi-kanla"></a>kanlakanla

x1 is a/the eye \[body-part\] of x2; \[metaphor: sensory apparatus\]; (adjective:) x1 is ocular.

<a id="valsi-kanro"></a>kanrokanro

x1 is healthy/fit/well/in good health by standard x2.

<a id="valsi-kansa"></a>kansakansa

x1 is with/accompanies/is a companion of x2, in state/condition/enterprise x3 (event/state).

<a id="valsi-karce"></a>karcekarce

x1 is a car/automobile/truck/van \[a wheeled motor vehicle\] for carrying x2, propelled by x3

<a id="valsi-karcykla"></a>karcykla

x1 comes/goes to x2 from x3 via route x4 using car x5

<a id="valsi-kau"></a>kau

discursive: marks word serving as focus of indirect question: "I know WHO went to the store".

mi djuno le du'u ma kau darxi ba'e la .alis. — I know who hit Alice (not someone else).

<a id="valsi-kavbu"></a>kavbukavbu

x1 captures/catches/apprehends/seizes/nabs x2 with trap/restraint x3.

<a id="valsi-ke"></a>ke

start grouping of tanru, etc; ... type of ... ; overrides normal tanru left grouping.

<a id="valsi-keha"></a>ke'a

pro-sumti: relativized sumti (object of relative clause).

<a id="valsi-kehe"></a>ke'e

elidable terminator: end of tanru left grouping override (usually elidable).

<a id="valsi-kehi"></a>ke'i

open interval bracket marker; modifies intervals in non-logical connectives; exclude boundaries.

<a id="valsi-keho"></a>ke'o

vocative: please repeat.

<a id="valsi-kehu"></a>ke'u

discursive: repeating - continuing.

<a id="valsi-kehunai"></a>ke'unai

discursive: repeating - continuing.

<a id="valsi-kei"></a>kei

elidable terminator: end abstraction bridi (often elidable).

<a id="valsi-kelci"></a>kelcikelci

x1 \[agent\] plays with plaything/toy x2.

<a id="valsi-kelvo"></a>kelvokelvo

x1 is x2 degree(s) Kelvin \[metric unit\] in temperature (default is 1) by standard x3.

<a id="valsi-kerlo"></a>kerlokerlo

x1 is a/the ear \[body-part\] of x2; \[metaphor: sensory apparatus, information gathering\].

<a id="valsi-ketco"></a>ketcoketco

x1 reflects South American culture/nationality/geography in aspect x2.

<a id="valsi-kevna"></a>kevnakevna

x1 is a cavity/hole/hollow/cavern in x2; x1 is concave within x2; x2 is hollow at locus x1.

<a id="valsi-ki"></a>ki

tense/modal: set/use tense default; establishes new open scope space/time/modal reference base.

<a id="valsi-kiha"></a>ki'a

attitudinal question: confusion about something said.

<a id="valsi-kiho"></a>ki'o

digit/number: number comma; thousands.

<a id="valsi-kihu"></a>ki'ukihu

krinu modal, 1st place (justified by) justifiably; because of reason ...

<a id="valsi-kilto"></a>kiltokilto

x1 is a thousand \[1000; 103\] of x2 in dimension/aspect x3 (default is units).

<a id="valsi-kisto"></a>kistokisto

x1 reflects Pakistani/Pashto culture/nationality/language in aspect x2.

<a id="valsi-klama"></a>klamaklama

x1 comes/goes to destination x2 from origin x3 via route x4 using means/vehicle x5.

xu do klama fi la .nipon. — Are you from Japan?

le dargu cu se kruca lu'a le pu ve klama be le ractu — The road crossed what was the rabbit's track.

mi'a pu klama fu le ka se marce le bloti vau fo lu'a le lalxu fi le zdani fe le daplu — We sailed on the boat along the lake from the home to an island.

mi pu klama fi la .nipon. fu le ka se marce le vinji — I flew from Japan.

ra pu klama le nenri — He came in.

<a id="valsi-klesi"></a>klesiklesi

x1 (mass/si'o) is a class/category/subgroup/subset within x2 with defining property x3 (ka).

<a id="valsi-ko"></a>ko

pro-sumti: you (imperative); make it true for you, the listener.

ko kurji ko — Take care of yourself.

ko sisti — Stop it!

kukte ko — Enjoy your meal.

ko dasni le taxfu — Get dressed.

<a id="valsi-koha"></a>ko'a

pro-sumti: he/she/it/they #1 (specified by goi).

<a id="valsi-kohe"></a>ko'e

pro-sumti: he/she/it/they #2 (specified by goi).

<a id="valsi-kohi"></a>ko'i

pro-sumti: he/she/it/they #3 (specified by goi).

<a id="valsi-koho"></a>ko'o

pro-sumti: he/she/it/they #4 (specified by goi).

<a id="valsi-kohu"></a>ko'u

pro-sumti: he/she/it/they #5 (specified by goi).

<a id="valsi-kojna"></a>kojnakojna

x1 is a corner/point/at-least-3-dimensional \[solid\] angle \[shape/form\] in/on x2, of material x3.

<a id="valsi-korbi"></a>korbikorbi

x1 is an edge/margin/border/curb/boundary of x2 next-to/bordering-on x3.

<a id="valsi-korcu"></a>korcukorcu

(adjective:) x1 is bent/crooked/not straight or direct/\[twisted\]/folded.

<a id="valsi-kosta"></a>kostakosta

x1 is a coat/jacket/sweater/cloak/\[cape/shawl/pullover\] \[extra outer garment\] of material x2.

<a id="valsi-krasi"></a>krasikrasi

x1 (site/event) is a source/start/beginning/origin of x2 (object/event/process).

<a id="valsi-krecau"></a>krecau

x1 (body or body part) is hairless

<a id="valsi-krefu"></a>krefukrefu

x1 (event) is the x3'rd recurrence/repetition of x2 (abstract); x2 happens again in \[form\] x1.

<a id="valsi-krici"></a>kricikrici

x1 believes \[regardless of evidence/proof\] belief/creed x2 (du'u) is true/assumed about subject x3.

<a id="valsi-krinu"></a>krinukrinu

x1 (event/state) is a reason/justification/explanation for/causing/permitting x2 (event/state).

<a id="valsi-krixa"></a>krixakrixa

x1 cries out/yells/howls sound x2; x1 is a crier.

<a id="valsi-krorinsa"></a>krorinsa

r1\=k1 curtseys in front of r2.

<a id="valsi-kruji"></a>krujikruji

x1 is made of/contains/is a quantity of cream/emulsion/puree \[consistency\] of composition x2.

<a id="valsi-ku"></a>ku

elidable terminator: end description, modal, or negator sumti; often elidable.

<a id="valsi-kuarka"></a>kuarka

x1 is a quark with flavor x2.

<a id="valsi-kucli"></a>kuclikucli

x1 is curious/wonders about/is interested in/\[inquisitive about\] x2 (object/abstract).

<a id="valsi-kuha"></a>ku'a

non-logical connective: intersection of sets.

<a id="valsi-kuhe"></a>ku'e

elidable terminator: end mathematical (mex) forethought (Polish) expression; often elidable.

<a id="valsi-kuhi"></a>ku'i

discursive: however/but/in contrast.

<a id="valsi-kuho"></a>ku'o

elidable terminator: end NOI relative clause; always elidable, but preferred in complex clauses.

<a id="valsi-kuldihu"></a>kuldi'u

d1 is a building housing school c1 teaching subject c3 to audience c4.

<a id="valsi-kumfa"></a>kumfakumfa

x1 is a room of/in structure x2 surrounded by partitions/walls/ceiling/floor x3 (mass/jo'u).

<a id="valsi-kunti"></a>kuntikunti

x1 \[container\] is empty/vacant of x2 \[material\]; x1 is hollow.

<a id="valsi-kurji"></a>kurjikurji

x1 takes-care-of/looks after/attends to/provides for/is caretaker for x2 (object/event/person).

<a id="valsi-ky"></a>ky.

letteral for k.

<a id="valsi-la"></a>la

name descriptor: the one(s) called ... ; takes name or selbri description.

zo bruna cmene la .kevin. le pa pendo be mi — Brother is how friends call Kevin.

<a id="valsi-ladru"></a>ladruladru

x1 is made of/contains/is a quantity of milk from source x2; (adjective:) x1 is lactic/dairy.

<a id="valsi-laha"></a>la'a

discursive: probability - improbability.

la'a ti traji le ka misno — Probably, this is the most popular one.

ba'a ra ba zi mo'u zukte — He ought to finish soon.

<a id="valsi-lahasai"></a>la'asai

discursive: most likely

<a id="valsi-lahe"></a>la'e

the referent of (indirect pointer); uses the referent of a sumti as the desired sumti.

<a id="valsi-lahedihe"></a>la'edi'e

pro-sumti: the referent of the next utterance; the state to be describe: "WHAT was fun is ...".

<a id="valsi-lahedihu"></a>la'edi'u

pro-sumti: the referent of the last utterance; the state described: "IT was fun".

<a id="valsi-lahi"></a>la'i

name descriptor: the set of those named ... ; takes name or selbri description.

<a id="valsi-laho"></a>la'o

delimited non-Lojban name; the resulting quote sumti is treated as a name.

<a id="valsi-lahu"></a>la'ulahu

klani modal, 1st place (amount) quantifying ...; being a quantity of ...

<a id="valsi-lai"></a>lai

name descriptor: the mass of individual(s) named ... ; takes name or selbri description.

<a id="valsi-lanme"></a>lanmelanme

x1 is a sheep/\[lamb/ewe/ram\] of species/breed x2 of flock x3.

<a id="valsi-lantro"></a>lantro

x1 shepherds flock x2 composed of sheep x3

<a id="valsi-lanzu"></a>lanzulanzu

x1 (mass) is a family with members including x2 bonded/tied/joined according to standard x3.

<a id="valsi-latmo"></a>latmolatmo

x1 reflects Latin/Roman/Romance culture/empire/language in aspect x2.

<a id="valsi-lau"></a>lau

2-word letteral/shift: punctuation mark or special symbol follows.

<a id="valsi-le"></a>le

non-veridical descriptor: the one(s) described as ...

mi pu viska le pa fetsi .i ri melbi — I saw a female. She is pretty.

le pa sazri ca denpa — A driver waits.

<a id="valsi-lebna"></a>lebnalebna

x1 takes/gets/gains/obtains/seizes/\[removes\] x2 (object/property) from x3 (possessor).

<a id="valsi-leduhu"></a>ledu'u

bridi descriptor: that I describe as a proposition ...

<a id="valsi-legohi"></a>lego'i

description pro-sumti: reuses the value of the x1 of the previous bridi

<a id="valsi-leha"></a>le'aleha

klesi modal, 1st place (scalar set) in/of category ...

<a id="valsi-lehe"></a>le'e

non-veridical descriptor: the stereotype of those described as ...

<a id="valsi-lehi"></a>le'i

non-veridical descriptor: the set of those described as ..., treated as a set.

<a id="valsi-leho"></a>le'o

attitudinal modifier: aggressive - passive - defensive.

<a id="valsi-lehu"></a>le'u

end quote of questionable or out-of-context text; not elidable.

<a id="valsi-lei"></a>lei

non-veridical descriptor: the mass of individual(s) described as ...

<a id="valsi-leka"></a>leka

property descriptor: that I describe as ...-ness

<a id="valsi-lenei"></a>lenei

description pro-sumti: reuses the value of the x1 of the current bridi

<a id="valsi-lenku"></a>lenkulenku

x1 is cold/cool by standard x2.

<a id="valsi-lenu"></a>lenu

specific event descriptor: contraction of {le nu} and identical in meaning.

<a id="valsi-lerci"></a>lercilerci

x1 (event) is late by standard x2.

<a id="valsi-lerfu"></a>lerfulerfu

x1 (la'e zo BY/word-bu) is a letter/digit/symbol in alphabet/character-set x2 representing x3.

<a id="valsi-lervla"></a>lervla

v1 is a word which stands for the letter/digit/symbol v2\=l1 in language v3.

<a id="valsi-lesiho"></a>lesi'o

idea descriptor: that I describe as a concept ...

<a id="valsi-li"></a>li

the number/evaluated expression; convert number/operand/evaluated math expression to sumti.

li vo cu sumji li re li re — 4 is the sum of 2 and 2.

<a id="valsi-libjo"></a>libjolibjo

x1 reflects Libyan culture/nationality in aspect x2.

<a id="valsi-lifri"></a>lifrilifri

x1 \[person/passive/state\] undergoes/experiences x2 (event/experience); x2 happens to x1.

<a id="valsi-lihi"></a>li'i

abstractor: experience abstractor; x1 is x2's experience of \[bridi\] (participant or observer).

<a id="valsi-liho"></a>li'o

discursive: omitted text (quoted material).

<a id="valsi-lihu"></a>li'u

elidable terminator: end grammatical quotation; seldom elidable except at end of text.

<a id="valsi-lijda"></a>lijdalijda

x1 is a religion of believers including x2 sharing common beliefs/practices/tenets including x3.

<a id="valsi-lijgri"></a>lijgri

g1 is a row (group) showing common property (ka) g2 due to set g3 linked by relations g4.

<a id="valsi-lindi"></a>lindilindi

x1 is lightning/electrical arc/thunderbolt striking at/extending to x2 from x3.

<a id="valsi-linji"></a>linjilinji

x1 is a line/among lines \[1-dimensional shape/form\] defined by set of points x2.

<a id="valsi-linsi"></a>linsilinsi

x1 is a length of chain/links of material x2 with link properties x3.

<a id="valsi-lisri"></a>lisrilisri

x1 is a story/tale/yarn/narrative about plot/subject/moral x2 by storyteller x3 to audience x4.

<a id="valsi-liste"></a>listeliste

x1 (physical object) is a list/catalog/register of sequence/set x2 in order x3 in medium x4.

<a id="valsi-litki"></a>litkilitki

x1 is liquid/fluid, of composition/material including x2, under conditions x3.

<a id="valsi-litru"></a>litrulitru

x1 travels/journeys/goes/moves via route x2 using means/vehicle x3; x1 is a traveller.

<a id="valsi-lo"></a>lo

descriptor: the one, which (is / does) ... / those, which (are / do) ...

<a id="valsi-logji"></a>logjilogji

x1 \[rules/methods\] is a logic for deducing/concluding/inferring/reasoning to/about x2 (du'u).

<a id="valsi-loha"></a>lo'a

shift letterals to Lojban (Roman) alphabet.

<a id="valsi-lohe"></a>lo'e

veridical descriptor: the typical one(s) who really is(are) ...

<a id="valsi-lohi"></a>lo'i

veridical descriptor: the set of those that really are ..., treated as a set.

<a id="valsi-loho"></a>lo'o

elidable terminator: end math express.(mex) sumti; end mex-to-sumti conversion; usually elidable.

<a id="valsi-lohu"></a>lo'u

start questionable/out-of-context quote; text should be Lojban words, but needn't be grammatical.

<a id="valsi-loi"></a>loi

veridical descriptor: the mass of individual(s) that is(are) ...

<a id="valsi-lojban"></a>.lojban.

Lojban.

<a id="valsi-lojbangirz"></a>lojbangirz

Logical Language Group (LLG)

<a id="valsi-lojbaugri"></a>lojbaugri

x1 is the Logical Language Group (LLG).

<a id="valsi-lojbo"></a>lojbolojbo

x1 reflects \[Loglandic\]/Lojbanic language/culture/nationality/community in aspect x2.

mi lojbo le ka se cinri la .lojban. vau .i je mi na se bangu la .lojban. — I'm a Lojbanic person in that I'm interested in Lojban; I don't speak it.

<a id="valsi-loldi"></a>loldiloldi

x1 is a floor/bottom/ground of x2.

<a id="valsi-lonu"></a>lonu

event descriptor: contraction of {lo nu} and identical in meaning.

<a id="valsi-lu"></a>lu

start grammatical quotation; quoted text should be grammatical on its own.

mi pu cusku lu coi le pendo li'u — I said "Hello, friends!"

<a id="valsi-lubno"></a>lubnolubno

x1 reflects Lebanese culture/nationality in aspect x2.

<a id="valsi-lubu"></a>lubu

letteral for a quotation

<a id="valsi-luha"></a>lu'a

the members of the set/components of the mass; converts another description type to individuals.

<a id="valsi-luhe"></a>lu'e

the symbol for (indirect discourse); uses the symbol/word(s) for a sumti as the desired sumti.

<a id="valsi-luhi"></a>lu'i

the set with members; converts another description type to a set of the members.

<a id="valsi-luho"></a>lu'o

the mass composed of; converts another description type to a mass composed of the members.

<a id="valsi-luhu"></a>lu'u

elidable terminator: end of sumti qualifiers; usually elidable except before a sumti.

<a id="valsi-lujvo"></a>lujvolujvo

x1 (text) is a compound predicate word with meaning x2 and arguments x3 built from metaphor x4.

<a id="valsi-ly"></a>ly.

letteral for l.

<a id="valsi-ma"></a>ma

pro-sumti: sumti question (what/who/how/why/etc.); appropriately fill in sumti blank.

do djica ma — What do you want?

ma prenu gi'e pu zvati ti — Who was here?

ma dacti gi'e pu zvati ti — What object was here?

<a id="valsi-mabla"></a>mablamabla

x1 is execrable/deplorable/wretched/shitty/awful/rotten/miserable/contemptible/crappy/inferior/low-quality in property x2 by standard x3; x1 stinks/sucks in aspect x2 according to x3.

<a id="valsi-maha"></a>ma'a

pro-sumti: me/we the speaker(s)/author(s) & you the listener(s) & others unspecified.

<a id="valsi-mahi"></a>ma'imahi

manri modal, 1st place (by standard 2) in reference frame ...

<a id="valsi-maho"></a>ma'o

convert letteral string or other mathematical expression (mex) operand to mex operator.

<a id="valsi-mahu"></a>ma'u

digit/number: plus sign; positive number; default any positive.

<a id="valsi-mai"></a>mai

utterance ordinal suffix; converts a number to an ordinal, such as an item or paragraph number.

<a id="valsi-makau"></a>makau

indirect question as in "I know WHO she was"

<a id="valsi-mamta"></a>mamtamamta

x1 is a mother of x2; x1 bears/mothers/acts maternally toward x2; \[not necessarily biological\].

<a id="valsi-manci"></a>mancimanci

x1 feels wonder/awe/marvels about x2.

<a id="valsi-manku"></a>mankumanku

x1 is dark/lacking in illumination.

<a id="valsi-mapti"></a>maptimapti

x1 fits/matches/suits/is compatible/appropriate/corresponds to/with x2 in property/aspect x3.

<a id="valsi-marji"></a>marjimarji

x1 is material/stuff/matter of type/composition including x2 in shape/form x3.

<a id="valsi-masno"></a>masnomasno

x1 is slow/sluggish at doing/being/bringing about x2 (event/state).

<a id="valsi-matne"></a>matnematne

x1 is a quantity of/contains butter/oleo/margarine/shortening from source x2.

<a id="valsi-mau"></a>maumau

zmadu modal, 1st place (a greater) exceeded by ... ; usually a sumti modifier.

<a id="valsi-me"></a>me

convert sumti to selbri/tanru element; x1 is specific to \[sumti\] in aspect x2.

ti me le titla vanju — This is an example of sweet wine.

xu do me le ctuca — Are you one of the teachers?

<a id="valsi-megdo"></a>megdomegdo

x1 is a million \[106\] of x2 in dimension/aspect x3 (default is units).

<a id="valsi-meha"></a>me'ameha

mleca modal, 1st place (a lesser) undercut by ... ; usually a sumti modifier.

<a id="valsi-mehe"></a>me'emehe

cmene modal, 1st place (requires quote) with name ...; so-called ...

<a id="valsi-mehi"></a>me'i

digit/number: less than.

<a id="valsi-meho"></a>me'o

the mathematical expression (unevaluated); convert unevaluated mathematical expression to sumti.

<a id="valsi-mehu"></a>me'u

elidable terminator: end sumti that was converted to selbri; usually elidable.

<a id="valsi-mei"></a>mei

convert number to cardinality selbri; x1 is a mass formed from a set x2 of n members, one or more of which is/are x3, measured relative to the set x4.

<a id="valsi-mekso"></a>meksomekso

x1 \[quantifier/expression\] is a mathematical expression interpreted under rules/convention x2.

<a id="valsi-melbi"></a>melbimelbi

x1 is beautiful/pleasant to x2 in aspect x3 (ka) by aesthetic standard x4.

<a id="valsi-meljo"></a>meljomeljo

x1 reflects Malaysian/Malay culture/nationality/language in aspect x2.

<a id="valsi-menli"></a>menlimenli

x1 is a mind/intellect/psyche/mentality/\[consciousness\] of body x2.

<a id="valsi-mensi"></a>mensimensi

x1 is a sister of/sororal to x2 by bond/tie/standard/parent(s) x3; \[not necessarily biological\].

<a id="valsi-merko"></a>merkomerko

x1 pertains to USA/American culture/nationality/dialect in aspect x2.

<a id="valsi-mexno"></a>mexnomexno

x1 reflects Mexican culture/nationality in aspect x2.

<a id="valsi-mi"></a>mi

pro-sumti: me/we the speaker(s)/author(s); identified by self-vocative.

mi gleki — I'm happy.

<a id="valsi-midju"></a>midjumidju

x1 is in/at the middle/center/midpoint/\[is a focus\] of x2; (adjective:) x1 is central.

<a id="valsi-miha"></a>mi'a

pro-sumti: me/we the speaker(s)/author(s) & others unspecified, but not you, the listener.

<a id="valsi-mihe"></a>mi'e

self vocative: self-introduction - denial of identity; identifies speaker.

<a id="valsi-mihi"></a>mi'i

non-logical interval connective: ordered components: ... center, ... range surrounding center.

<a id="valsi-miho"></a>mi'o

pro-sumti: me/we the speaker(s)/author(s) & you the listener(s).

<a id="valsi-mihu"></a>mi'u

discursive: ditto.

<a id="valsi-mikce"></a>mikcemikce

x1 doctors/treats/nurses/\[cures\]/is physician/midwife to x2 for ailment x3 by treatment/cure x4.

<a id="valsi-mikri"></a>mikrimikri

x1 is a millionth \[10\-6\] of x2 in dimension/aspect x3 (default is units).

<a id="valsi-milti"></a>miltimilti

x1 is a thousandth \[1/1000; 10\-3\] of x2 in dimension/aspect x3 (default is units).

<a id="valsi-milxe"></a>milxemilxe

x1 is mild/non-extreme/gentle/middling/somewhat in property x2 (ka); x1 is not very x2.

<a id="valsi-minde"></a>mindeminde

x1 issues commands/orders to x2 for result x3 (event/state) to happen; x3 is commanded to occur.

<a id="valsi-minli"></a>minliminli

x1 is x2 (default 1) long local distance unit(s) \[non-metric\], x3 subunits, standard x4.

<a id="valsi-mintu"></a>mintumintu

x1 is the same/identical thing as x2 by standard x3; (x1 and x2 interchangeable).

<a id="valsi-misro"></a>misromisro

x1 reflects Egyptian culture/nationality in aspect x2.

<a id="valsi-mixre"></a>mixremixre

x1 (mass) is a mixture/blend/colloid/commingling with ingredients including x2.

<a id="valsi-mlana"></a>mlanamlana

x1 is to the side of/lateral to x2 and facing x3 from point of view/in-frame-of-reference x4.

<a id="valsi-mlatu"></a>mlatumlatu

x1 is a cat/\[puss/pussy/kitten\] \[feline animal\] of species/breed x2; (adjective:) x1 is feline.

<a id="valsi-mleca"></a>mlecamleca

x1 is less than x2 in property/quantity x3 (ka/ni) by amount x4.

<a id="valsi-mo"></a>mo

pro-bridi: bridi/selbri/brivla question.

do mo — How are you?

la .lojban. cu mo — What is Lojban?

<a id="valsi-moha"></a>mo'a

digit/number: too few; subjective.

<a id="valsi-mohe"></a>mo'e

convert sumti to mex operand; sample use in story arithmetic: \[3 apples\] + \[3 apples\] = what.

<a id="valsi-mohi"></a>mo'i

mark motions in space-time.

<a id="valsi-moho"></a>mo'o

higher-order utterance ordinal suffix; converts a number to ordinal, usually a section/chapter.

<a id="valsi-mohu"></a>mo'u

interval event contour: at the natural ending point of ...; completive | >|<.

<a id="valsi-moi"></a>moi

convert number to ordinal selbri; x1 is (n)th member of set x2 ordered by rule x3.

<a id="valsi-mojysuha"></a>mojysu'a

s1 is a structure of parts s2 as a monument/memorial to m3.

<a id="valsi-mokca"></a>mokcamokca

x1 is a point/instant/moment \[0-dimensional shape/form\] in/on/at time/place x2.

<a id="valsi-molro"></a>molromolro

x1 is x2 mole(s) \[metric unit\] in substance (default is 1) by standard x3.

<a id="valsi-morji"></a>morjimorji

x1 remembers/recalls/recollects fact(s)/memory x2 (du'u) about subject x3.

<a id="valsi-morko"></a>morkomorko

x1 reflects Moroccan culture/nationality in aspect x2.

<a id="valsi-morsi"></a>morsimorsi

x1 is dead/has ceased to be alive.

<a id="valsi-mrostu"></a>mrostu

s1 is the grave/tomb of m1\=s2.

<a id="valsi-mu"></a>mu

digit/number: 5 (digit) \[five\].

<a id="valsi-muha"></a>mu'a

discursive: for example - omitting - end examples.

<a id="valsi-muhanai"></a>mu'anai

discursive: for example - omitting - end examples.

<a id="valsi-muhe"></a>mu'e

abstractor: achievement (event) abstractor; x1 is the event-as-a-point/achievement of \[bridi\].

<a id="valsi-muhi"></a>mu'imuhi

mukti modal, 1st place because of motive ...

<a id="valsi-muhonai"></a>mu'onai

vocative: over (response OK) - more to come.

<a id="valsi-mukti"></a>muktimukti

x1 (action/event/state) motivates/is a motive/incentive for action/event x2, per volition of x3.

<a id="valsi-mulgri"></a>mulgri

g1\=m1 is a complete set showing common property (ka) g2, complete by standard m3.

<a id="valsi-mulno"></a>mulnomulno

x1 (event) is complete/done/finished; x1 (object) has become whole in property x2 by standard x3.

<a id="valsi-murta"></a>murtamurta

x1 is a curtain/blinds/drapes for covering/obscuring aperture x2, and made of material x3.

<a id="valsi-muslo"></a>muslomuslo

x1 pertains to the Islamic/Moslem/Koranic \[Quranic\] culture/religion/nation in aspect x2.

<a id="valsi-mutce"></a>mutcemutce

x1 is much/extreme in property x2 (ka), towards x3 extreme/direction; x1 is, in x2, very x3.

ti mutce le ka kargu — This is very expensive.

mi mutce le ka senpi — I highly doubt that.

<a id="valsi-muvdu"></a>muvdumuvdu

x1 (object) moves to destination/receiver x2 \[away\] from origin x3 over path/route x4.

<a id="valsi-my"></a>my.

letteral for m.

<a id="valsi-na"></a>na

bridi contradictory negator; scope is an entire bridi; logically negates in some cmavo compounds.

na ku le speni be mi cu citno — It's not true that my wife is young.

<a id="valsi-naha"></a>na'a

cancel all letteral shifts.

<a id="valsi-nahe"></a>na'e

contrary scalar negator: other than ...; not ...; a scale or set is implied.

na'e vajni mi — It's not important to me.

do ba na'e snada — You won't make it (won't succeed).

na'e bo mi pu zukte — Not I did it.

<a id="valsi-nahi"></a>na'i

discursive: metalinguistic negator.

<a id="valsi-naho"></a>na'o

tense interval modifier: characteristically/typically; tense/modal; defaults as time tense.

<a id="valsi-nahu"></a>na'u

convert selbri to mex operator; used to create less-used operators using fu'ivla, lujvo, etc.

<a id="valsi-nahujbi"></a>na'ujbi

x1 is approximately equal to x2.

<a id="valsi-nai"></a>nai

attached to cmavo to negate them; various negation-related meanings.

.ui .i .ui nai — Yay! Alas!

<a id="valsi-naja"></a>naja

logical connective: tanru-internal afterthought conditional/only if.

<a id="valsi-najnimre"></a>najnimre

x1 is an orange of variety x2.

<a id="valsi-naku"></a>naku

(adverbial) bridi contradictory negator; "it is not true that...."; negates the bridi as well as any other adverbial or quantifier located on its right.

<a id="valsi-nakykemcinctu"></a>nakykemcinctu

x1 is a male teacher of sexuality to audience x2.

<a id="valsi-namcu"></a>namcunamcu

x1 (li) is a number/quantifier/digit/value/figure (noun); refers to the value and not the symbol.

<a id="valsi-nanba"></a>nanbananba

x1 is a quantity of/contains bread \[leavened or unleavened\] made from grains x2.

<a id="valsi-nanla"></a>nanlananla

x1 is a boy/lad \[young male person\] of age x2 immature by standard x3.

<a id="valsi-nanmu"></a>nanmunanmu

x1 is a man/men; x1 is a male humanoid person \[not necessarily adult\].

<a id="valsi-nanvi"></a>nanvinanvi

x1 is a billionth/thousand-millionth \[10\-9\] of x2 in dimension/aspect x3 (default is units).

<a id="valsi-nau"></a>nau

tense: refers to current space/time reference absolutely.

<a id="valsi-ne"></a>ne

non-restrictive relative phrase marker: which incidentally is associated with ...

<a id="valsi-neha"></a>ne'a

location tense relation/direction; approximating/next to ...

<a id="valsi-nehi"></a>ne'i

location tense relation/direction; within/inside of/into ...

<a id="valsi-nei"></a>nei

pro-bridi: repeats the current bridi.

<a id="valsi-ni"></a>ni

abstractor: quantity/amount abstractor; x1 is quantity/amount of \[bridi\] measured on scale x2.

<a id="valsi-nibli"></a>niblinibli

x1 logically necessitates/entails/implies action/event/state x2 under rules/logic system x3.

<a id="valsi-nicte"></a>nictenicte

x1 is a nighttime of day x2 at location x3; (adjective:) x1 is at night/nocturnal.

<a id="valsi-niha"></a>ni'a

location tense relation/direction; downwards/down from ...

<a id="valsi-nihe"></a>ni'e

convert selbri to mex operand; used to create new non-numerical quantifiers; e.g. "herd" of oxen.

<a id="valsi-nihi"></a>ni'inihi

nibli modal, 1st place logically; logically because ...

<a id="valsi-niho"></a>ni'o

discursive: paragraph break; introduce new topic.

<a id="valsi-nihu"></a>ni'u

digit/number: minus sign; negative number); default any negative.

<a id="valsi-nimre"></a>nimrenimre

x1 is a quantity of citrus \[fruit/tree, etc.\] of species/strain x2.

<a id="valsi-ninmu"></a>ninmuninmu

x1 is a woman/women; x1 is a female humanoid person \[not necessarily adult\].

<a id="valsi-nitcu"></a>nitcunitcu

x1 needs/requires/is dependent on/\[wants\] necessity x2 for purpose/action/stage of process x3.

<a id="valsi-nixli"></a>nixlinixli

x1 is a girl \[young female person\] of age x2 immature by standard x3.

<a id="valsi-no"></a>no

digit/number: 0 (digit) \[zero\].

<a id="valsi-nobli"></a>noblinobli

x1 is noble/aristocratic/elite/high-born/titled in/under culture/society/standard x2.

<a id="valsi-noda"></a>noda

logically quantified sumti: nothing at all (unless restricted).

<a id="valsi-noha"></a>no'a

pro-bridi: repeats the bridi in which this one is embedded.

<a id="valsi-nohe"></a>no'e

midpoint scalar negator: neutral point between je'a and to'e; "not really".

<a id="valsi-nohi"></a>no'i

discursive: paragraph break; resume previous topic.

<a id="valsi-noho"></a>no'o

digit/number: typical/average value.

<a id="valsi-nohu"></a>no'u

non-restrictive appositive phrase marker: which incidentally is the same thing as ...

<a id="valsi-noi"></a>noi

non-restrictive relative clause; attaches subordinate bridi with incidental information.

mi tavla do noi mi prami ke'a — I'm talking to you whom I love.

<a id="valsi-nolraitru"></a>nolraitru

t1\=n1 is a regent/monarch of t2 by standard n2.

<a id="valsi-noroi"></a>noroi

tense interval modifier: never; objectively quantified tense; defaults as time tense.

<a id="valsi-nu"></a>nu

abstractor: generalized event abstractor; x1 is state/process/achievement/activity of \[bridi\].

la .alis. cu nitcu le nu su'o da bevri le birje le nei — Alice needs to be given beer.

mi gleki le nu do klama — I am happy that you came.

le nu prami cu nu gunka — Loving is working.

<a id="valsi-nuha"></a>nu'a

convert mathematical expression (mex) operator to a selbri/tanru component.

<a id="valsi-nuhe"></a>nu'e

vocative: promise - promise release - un-promise.

<a id="valsi-nuhi"></a>nu'i

start forethought termset construct; marks start of place structure set with logical connection.

<a id="valsi-nuho"></a>nu'o

modal aspect: can but has not; unrealized potential.

mi pu pu'o je nu'o pencu — I almost touched it.

<a id="valsi-nuhu"></a>nu'u

elidable terminator: end forethought termset; usually elidable except with following sumti.

<a id="valsi-nuncti"></a>nuncti

n1 is an event at which c1 eat(s) c2.

<a id="valsi-nunctu"></a>nunctu

x1 (nu) is an event in which x2 teaches x3 facts x4 (du'u) about x5 by means x6; x1 is a lesson given by x2 to x3.

<a id="valsi-nunkla"></a>nunkla

n1 is a passage where goer k1 comes/goes to destination k2 from origin k3 via route k4 using means/vehicle k5.

<a id="valsi-nupre"></a>nuprenupre

x1 (agent) promises/commits/assures/threatens x2 (event/state) to x3 \[beneficiary/victim\].

<a id="valsi-nuzlo"></a>nuzlo

x1 reflects New Zealand culture/nationality/geography/dialect in aspect x2.

<a id="valsi-ny"></a>ny.

letteral for n.

<a id="valsi-o"></a>.o

logical connective: sumti afterthought biconditional/iff/if-and-only-if.

<a id="valsi-obu"></a>.obu

letteral for o.

<a id="valsi-ohe"></a>.o'e

attitudinal: closeness - distance.

<a id="valsi-ohocuhi"></a>.o'ocu'i

attitudinal: patience - mere tolerance - anger.

<a id="valsi-ohu"></a>.o'u

attitudinal: relaxation - composure - stress.

<a id="valsi-oi"></a>.oi

attitudinal: complaint - pleasure.

<a id="valsi-oinai"></a>.oinai

attitudinal: complaint - pleasure.

<a id="valsi-onai"></a>.onai

logical connective: sumti afterthought exclusive or; Latin 'aut'.

<a id="valsi-pa"></a>pa

digit/number: 1 (digit) \[one\].

pa smoka cu cpana le jubme — There is exactly one sock on the table.

<a id="valsi-pacna"></a>pacnapacna

x1 hopes/wishes for/desires x2 (event), expected likelihood x3 (0-1); x1 hopes that x2 happens.

<a id="valsi-pacruhi"></a>pacru'i

x1 is an evil spirit / demon

<a id="valsi-pagbu"></a>pagbupagbu

x1 is a part/component/piece/portion/segment of x2 \[where x2 is a whole/mass\]; x2 is partly x1.

<a id="valsi-pagre"></a>pagrepagre

x1 passes through/penetrates barrier/medium/portal x2 to destination side x3 from origin side x4.

<a id="valsi-pahe"></a>pa'e

discursive: justice - prejudice.

<a id="valsi-pahenai"></a>pa'enai

discursive: justice - prejudice.

<a id="valsi-paho"></a>pa'o

location tense relation/direction; transfixing/passing through ...

<a id="valsi-pai"></a>pai

digit/number: pi (approximately 3.1416...); the constant defined by the ratio of the circumference to the diameter of all circles.

<a id="valsi-palta"></a>paltapalta

x1 is a plate/dish/platter/saucer \[flat/mildly concave food service bed\] made of material x2.

<a id="valsi-pamai"></a>pamai

discursive: first utterance ordinal.

<a id="valsi-pamoi"></a>pamoi

quantified selbri: convert 1 to ordinal selbri; x1 is first among x2 ordered by rule x3.

<a id="valsi-panci"></a>pancipanci

x1 is an odor/fragrance/scent/smell emitted by x2 and detected by observer/sensor x3.

<a id="valsi-parehuku"></a>pare'uku

for the first time

<a id="valsi-paso"></a>paso

number/quantity: 19 \[nineteen\].

<a id="valsi-patytaha"></a>patyta'a

p1\=t1 complains verbally to p3\=t2 about p2\=t3 in language t4

<a id="valsi-pau"></a>pau

discursive: optional question premarker.

<a id="valsi-paunai"></a>paunai

discursive: unreal/rhetorical question follows.

<a id="valsi-pe"></a>pe

restrictive relative phrase marker: which is associated with ...; loosest associative/possessive.

ti du le pa karce pe la .alis. — This is a car of my friend.

le pendo be mi cu jai fenki .i le pendo pe mi cu jai fenki — My friend is crazy.

ti me le karce pe mi — This is my car.

<a id="valsi-peha"></a>pe'a

marks a construct as figurative (non-literal/metaphorical) speech/text.

<a id="valsi-pehe"></a>pe'e

marks the following connective as joining termsets.

<a id="valsi-pehi"></a>pe'i

evidential: I opine (subjective claim).

<a id="valsi-peho"></a>pe'o

forethought flag for mathematical expression (mex) Polish (forethought) operator.

<a id="valsi-pei"></a>pei

attitudinal: attitudinal question; how do you feel about it? with what intensity?.

.au pei mi kansa do — Do you want me to accompany you?

pei mi'o zvati le nu salci — What about going to the party?

<a id="valsi-pelji"></a>peljipelji

x1 is paper from source x2.

<a id="valsi-pelnimre"></a>pelnimre

x1 is a lemon of variety x2.

<a id="valsi-pelxu"></a>pelxupelxu

x1 is yellow/golden \[color adjective\].

<a id="valsi-pendo"></a>pendopendo

x1 is/acts as a friend of/to x2 (experiencer); x2 befriends x1.

<a id="valsi-penmi"></a>penmipenmi

x1 meets/encounters x2 at/in location x3.

<a id="valsi-pensi"></a>pensipensi

x1 thinks/considers/cogitates/reasons/is pensive about/reflects upon subject/concept x2.

<a id="valsi-petso"></a>petsopetso

x1 is 1015 of x2 in dimension/aspect x3 (default is units).

<a id="valsi-pezli"></a>pezlipezli

x1 is a leaf of plant x2; x1 is foliage of x2.

<a id="valsi-pi"></a>pi

digit/number: radix (number base) point; default decimal.

<a id="valsi-picti"></a>pictipicti

x1 is a trillionth \[10\-12\] of x2 in dimension/aspect x3 (default is units).

<a id="valsi-piha"></a>pi'a

n-ary mathematical operator: operands are vectors to be treated as matrix rows.

<a id="valsi-pihe"></a>pi'e

digit/number:separates digits for base >16, not current standard, or variable (e.g. time, date).

<a id="valsi-pihi"></a>pi'i

n-ary mathematical operator: times; multiplication operator; \[(((a \* b) \* c) \* ...)\].

<a id="valsi-piho"></a>pi'opiho

pilno modal, 1st place used by ...

<a id="valsi-pihu"></a>pi'u

non-logical connective: cross product; Cartesian product of sets.

<a id="valsi-pilno"></a>pilnopilno

x1 uses/employs x2 \[tool, apparatus, machine, agent, acting entity, material\] for purpose x3.

ra pu pilno le skami le nu facki le se nitcu — He used a computer to get the necessary information.

<a id="valsi-pimlu"></a>pimlupimlu

x1 is a/the feather/plume(s)/plumage \[body-part\] of animal/species x2.

<a id="valsi-pinta"></a>pintapinta

x1 is flat/level/horizontal in gravity/frame of reference x2.

<a id="valsi-pinxe"></a>pinxepinxe

x1 (agent) drinks/imbibes beverage/drink/liquid refreshment x2 from/out-of container/source x3.

<a id="valsi-piro"></a>piro

number: all of.

<a id="valsi-pisoha"></a>piso'a

number: almost all of.

<a id="valsi-pisohu"></a>piso'u

number: a little of.

<a id="valsi-pisuho"></a>pisu'o

number: at least some of.

<a id="valsi-pixra"></a>pixrapixra

x1 is a picture/illustration representing/showing x2, made by artist x3 in medium x4.

<a id="valsi-plipe"></a>plipeplipe

x1 (agent/object) leaps/jumps/springs/bounds to x2 from x3 reaching height x4 propelled by x5.

<a id="valsi-pluka"></a>plukapluka

x1 (event/state) seems pleasant to/pleases x2 under conditions x3.

<a id="valsi-pluta"></a>plutapluta

x1 is a route/path/way/course/track to x2 from x3 via/defined by points including x4 (set).

<a id="valsi-po"></a>po

restrictive relative phrase marker: which is specific to ...; normal possessive physical/legal.

<a id="valsi-pohe"></a>po'e

restrictive relative phrase marker: which belongs to ... ; inalienable possession.

<a id="valsi-poho"></a>po'o

discursive: uniquely, only, solely: the only relevant case.

mi pu te vecnu le jisra ku po'o — I bought only some juice.

<a id="valsi-pohu"></a>po'u

restrictive appositive phrase marker: which is the same thing as.

<a id="valsi-poi"></a>poi

restrictive relative clause; attaches subordinate bridi with identifying information to a sumti.

<a id="valsi-polje"></a>poljepolje

x1 (force) folds/creases x2 at locus/loci/forming crease(s)/bend(s) x3.

<a id="valsi-polno"></a>polnopolno

x1 reflects Polynesian/Oceanian (geographic region) culture/nationality/languages in aspect x2.

<a id="valsi-ponjo"></a>ponjoponjo

x1 reflects Japanese culture/nationality/language in aspect x2.

<a id="valsi-ponse"></a>ponseponse

x1 possesses/owns/has x2 under law/custom x3; x1 is owner/proprietor of x2 under x3.

<a id="valsi-porsi"></a>porsiporsi

x1 \[ordered set\] is sequenced/ordered/listed by comparison/rules x2 on unordered set x3.

<a id="valsi-porto"></a>portoporto

x1 reflects Portuguese culture/nationality/language in aspect x2.

<a id="valsi-prali"></a>praliprali

x1 is a profit/gain/benefit/advantage to x2 accruing/resulting from activity/process x3.

<a id="valsi-prenu"></a>prenuprenu

x1 is a person/people (noun) \[not necessarily human\]; x1 displays personality/a persona.

le xo prenu ca zvati ti voi kumfa — How many people are in this room now?

<a id="valsi-preti"></a>pretipreti

x1 (quoted text) is a question/query about subject x2 by questioner x3 to audience x4.

<a id="valsi-prije"></a>prijeprije

x1 is wise/sage about matter x2 (abstraction) to observer x3.

<a id="valsi-prina"></a>prinaprina

x1 is a print/impression/image on/in surface x2 of/made by/using tool/press/implement/object x3.

<a id="valsi-pritu"></a>pritupritu

x1 is to the right/right-hand side of x2 which faces/in-frame-of-reference x3.

<a id="valsi-pu"></a>pu

time tense relation/direction: did \[selbri\]; before/prior to \[sumti\]; default past tense.

mi pu na ku viska le mlatu — I didn't see the cat.

mi pu prami le pa nanmu — I loved one man.

mi ba tavla do pu le nu do cliva — I will talk to you before you leave.

<a id="valsi-puba"></a>puba

time tense: was going to; (tense/modal).

<a id="valsi-puhi"></a>pu'i

modal aspect: can and has; demonstrated potential.

<a id="valsi-puho"></a>pu'o

interval event contour: in anticipation of ...; until ... ; inchoative ----| |.

<a id="valsi-puhu"></a>pu'u

abstractor: process (event) abstractor; x1 is process of \[bridi\] proceeding in stages x2.

<a id="valsi-pulji"></a>puljipulji

x1 is a police officer/\[enforcer/vigilante\] enforcing law(s)/rule(s)/order x2.

<a id="valsi-punji"></a>punjipunji

x1 (agent) puts/places/sets x2 on/at surface/locus x3.

<a id="valsi-purci"></a>purcipurci

x1 is in the past of/earlier than/before x2 in time sequence; x1 is former; x2 is latter.

<a id="valsi-purdi"></a>purdipurdi

x1 is a garden/tended/cultivated field of family/community/farmer x2 growing plants/crop x3.

<a id="valsi-py"></a>py.

letteral for p.

<a id="valsi-ra"></a>ra

pro-sumti: a recent sumti before the last one, as determined by back-counting rules.

<a id="valsi-ractu"></a>racturactu

x1 is a rabbit/hare/\[doe\] of species/breed x2.

<a id="valsi-radno"></a>radnoradno

x1 is x2 radian(s) \[metric unit\] in angular measure (default is 1) by standard x3.

<a id="valsi-rafsi"></a>rafsirafsi

x1 is an affix/suffix/prefix/combining-form for word/concept x2, form/properties x3, language x4.

<a id="valsi-raha"></a>ra'araha

srana modal, 1st place pertained to by ... (generally more specific).

<a id="valsi-rahe"></a>ra'e

digit/number: repeating digits (of a decimal) follow.

<a id="valsi-rahi"></a>ra'irahi

krasi modal, 1st place from source/origin/starting point ...

<a id="valsi-raho"></a>ra'o

flag GOhA to indicate pro-assignment context updating for all pro-assigns in referenced bridi.

<a id="valsi-rahu"></a>ra'u

discursive: chiefly - equally - incidentally.

<a id="valsi-rahucuhi"></a>ra'ucu'i

discursive: chiefly - equally - incidentally.

<a id="valsi-rahunai"></a>ra'unai

discursive: chiefly - equally - incidentally.

<a id="valsi-rai"></a>rairai

traji modal, 1st place with superlative ...

<a id="valsi-rakso"></a>raksorakso

x1 reflects Iraqi culture/nationality in aspect x2.

<a id="valsi-raktu"></a>rakturaktu

x1 (object/person/event/situation) troubles/disturbs x2 (person) causing problem(s) x3.

<a id="valsi-ralju"></a>raljuralju

x1 is principal/chief/leader/main/\[staple\], most significant among x2 (set) in property x3 (ka).

<a id="valsi-ranji"></a>ranjiranji

x1 (event/state) continues/persists over interval x2; x1 (property - ka) is continuous over x2.

<a id="valsi-rarna"></a>rarnararna

x1 is natural/spontaneous/instinctive, not \[consciously\] caused by person(s).

<a id="valsi-ratcu"></a>ratcuratcu

x1 is a rat of species/breed x2.

<a id="valsi-rau"></a>rau

digit/number: enough; subjective.

<a id="valsi-re"></a>re

digit/number: 2 (digit) \[two\].

re cribe ca cpana le bisli — There are two bears on the ice.

<a id="valsi-rehi"></a>re'i

vocative: ready to receive - not ready to receive.

<a id="valsi-rehinai"></a>re'inai

vocative: ready to receive - not ready to receive.

<a id="valsi-reho"></a>re'o

location tense relation/direction; adjacent to/touching/contacting ...

<a id="valsi-rehu"></a>re'u

converts number to an objectively quantified ordinal tense interval modifier; defaults to time.

<a id="valsi-remai"></a>remai

discursive: second utterance ordinal.

<a id="valsi-remei"></a>remei

quantified selbri: convert 2 to cardinal selbri; x1 is a set with the pair of members x2.

<a id="valsi-remna"></a>remnaremna

x1 is a human/human being/man (non-specific gender-free sense); (adjective:) x1 is human.

<a id="valsi-rerehu"></a>rere'u

for the second time ...

<a id="valsi-reroi"></a>reroi

tense interval modifier: twice; objectively quantified tense; defaults as time tense.

<a id="valsi-retsku"></a>retsku

c1\=p3 asks/puts question c2\=p1 (sedu'u/text/lu'e concept) of/to c3\=p4 via expressive medium c4 about subject p2.

<a id="valsi-ri"></a>ri

pro-sumti: the last sumti, as determined by back-counting rules.

<a id="valsi-ricfu"></a>ricfuricfu

x1 is rich/wealthy in goods/possessions/property/aspect x2.

<a id="valsi-rigni"></a>rignirigni

x1 is repugnant to/causes disgust to x2 under conditions x3.

<a id="valsi-riha"></a>ri'ariha

rinka modal, 1st place (phys./mental) causal because ...

<a id="valsi-rihe"></a>ri'e

attitudinal modifier: release of emotion - emotion restraint.

<a id="valsi-rinka"></a>rinkarinka

x1 (event/state) effects/physically causes effect x2 (event/state) under conditions x3.

<a id="valsi-rirxe"></a>rirxerirxe

x1 is a river of land mass x2, draining watershed x3 into x4/terminating at x4.

<a id="valsi-risna"></a>risnarisna

x1 is a/the heart \[body-part\] of x2; \[emotional/shape metaphors are NOT culturally neutral\].

<a id="valsi-ro"></a>ro

digit/number: each, all.

ro mlatu cu danlu — Cats are animals.

le ro pendo be mi cu cusku le se du'u mi simlu le ka tatpi — All of my friends say that I look tired.

<a id="valsi-roha"></a>ro'a

emotion category/modifier: social - antisocial.

<a id="valsi-rohanai"></a>ro'anai

emotion category/modifier: social - antisocial.

<a id="valsi-rohe"></a>ro'e

emotion category/modifier: mental - mindless.

<a id="valsi-roho"></a>ro'o

emotion category/modifier: physical - denying physical.

<a id="valsi-rohu"></a>ro'u

emotion category/modifier: sexual - sexual abstinence.

<a id="valsi-roi"></a>roi

converts number to an objectively quantified tense interval modifier; defaults to time tense.

<a id="valsi-romai"></a>romai

discursive utterance ordinal: finally; last utterance ordinal.

<a id="valsi-ropno"></a>ropnoropno

x1 reflects European culture/nationality/geography/Indo-European languages in aspect x2.

<a id="valsi-ru"></a>ru

pro-sumti: a remote past sumti, before all other in-use backcounting sumti.

<a id="valsi-ruble"></a>rubleruble

x1 is weak/feeble/frail in property/quality/aspect x2 (ka) by standard x3.

<a id="valsi-ruha"></a>ru'a

evidential: I postulate.

<a id="valsi-ruhe"></a>ru'e

attitudinal: weak intensity attitude modifier.

.ui ru'e do snada — Yay, you won.

<a id="valsi-ruhi"></a>ru'i

tense interval modifier: continuously; subjective tense/modal; defaults as time tense.

<a id="valsi-ruhinai"></a>ru'inai

tense interval modifier: occasional/intermittent/discontinuous; defaults as time tense.

<a id="valsi-ruho"></a>ru'o

shift letterals to Cyrillic alphabet.

<a id="valsi-ruhu"></a>ru'u

location tense relation/direction; surrounding/annular ...

<a id="valsi-rusko"></a>ruskorusko

x1 reflects Russian culture/nationality/language in aspect x2.

<a id="valsi-rutrceraso"></a>rutrceraso

x1 is a cherry of species x2.

<a id="valsi-ry"></a>ry.

letteral for r.

<a id="valsi-sa"></a>sa

erase complete or partial utterance; next word shows how much erasing to do.

<a id="valsi-sadjo"></a>sadjosadjo

x1 reflects Saudi Arabian culture/nationality in aspect x2.

<a id="valsi-saha"></a>sa'a

discursive: material inserted by editor/narrator (bracketed text).

<a id="valsi-sahenai"></a>sa'enai

discursive: precisely speaking - loosely speaking.

<a id="valsi-sahi"></a>sa'i

n-ary mathematical operator: operands are vectors to be treated as matrix columns.

<a id="valsi-sahunai"></a>sa'unai

discursive: simply - elaborating.

<a id="valsi-sai"></a>sai

attitudinal: moderate intensity attitude modifier.

.ui sai do snada — Yay, you won!

<a id="valsi-sakli"></a>saklisakli

x1 slides/slips/glides on x2.

<a id="valsi-sakta"></a>saktasakta

x1 is made of/contains/is a quantity of sugar \[sweet edible\] from source x2 of composition x3.

<a id="valsi-salci"></a>salcisalci

x1 celebrates/recognizes/honors x2 (event/abstract) with activity/\[party\] x3.

<a id="valsi-salpo"></a>salposalpo

x1 is sloped/inclined/slanted/aslant with angle x2 to horizon/frame x3.

<a id="valsi-sampu"></a>sampusampu

x1 is simple/unmixed/uncomplicated in property x2 (ka).

<a id="valsi-sance"></a>sancesance

x1 is sound produced/emitted by x2.

<a id="valsi-sanga"></a>sangasanga

x1 sings/chants x2 \[song/hymn/melody/melodic sounds\] to audience x3.

<a id="valsi-sanji"></a>sanjisanji

x1 is conscious/aware of x2 (object/abstract); x1 discerns/recognizes x2 (object/abstract).

<a id="valsi-sanli"></a>sanlisanli

x1 stands \[is vertically oriented\] on surface x2 supported by limbs/support/pedestal x3.

<a id="valsi-sanmi"></a>sanmisanmi

x1 (mass) is a meal composed of dishes including x2.

<a id="valsi-saske"></a>saskesaske

x1 (mass of facts) is science of/about subject matter x2 based on methodology x3.

<a id="valsi-savru"></a>savrusavru

x1 is a noise/din/clamor \[sensory input without useful information\] to x2 via sensory channel x3.

<a id="valsi-se"></a>se

2nd conversion; switch 1st/2nd places.

mi se slabu le ctuca .i va'i le ctuca cu slabu mi — I am familiar with the teacher. In other words, the teacher is familiar to me.

<a id="valsi-sebahi"></a>seba'isebahi

basti modal, 2nd place instead of ...

<a id="valsi-seduhu"></a>sedu'u

compound abstractor: sentence/equation abstract; x1 is text expressing \[bridi\] which is x2.

<a id="valsi-seha"></a>se'a

attitudinal modifier: self-sufficiency - dependency.

<a id="valsi-sehe"></a>se'e

following digits code a character (in ASCII, Unicode, etc.).

<a id="valsi-sehi"></a>se'i

attitudinal modifier: self-oriented - other-oriented.

<a id="valsi-seho"></a>se'o

evidential: I know by internal experience (dream, vision, or personal revelation).

<a id="valsi-sehu"></a>se'u

elidable terminator: end discursive bridi or mathematical precedence;usually elidable.

<a id="valsi-sei"></a>sei

start discursive (metalinguistic) bridi.

sei mi morji do ctuca — As I remember, you are a teacher.

sei mi bebna le zarci cu se stuzi le drata — Silly me, the store is in another place.

<a id="valsi-sejahe"></a>seja'esejahe

jalge modal, 2nd place (event causal) results because of ...

<a id="valsi-sejaheku"></a>seja'eku

therefore, resultingly

<a id="valsi-sekaha"></a>seka'asekaha

klama modal, 2nd place with destination ...

<a id="valsi-selahu"></a>sela'uselahu

klani modal, 2nd place in quantity ...; measured as ...

<a id="valsi-selbri"></a>selbri

x2\=b1 (du'u) is a predicate relationship with relation x1\=b2 among arguments x3\=b3 (ordered set).

<a id="valsi-selkla"></a>selkla

To destination x1 does x2 go from x3 via route x4 by means x5.

<a id="valsi-selmaho"></a>selma'o

x1 is the class of structure word x2, which means or has function x3 in language x4.

<a id="valsi-selsku"></a>selsku

c2 is said by c1 to audience c3 via expressive medium c4.

<a id="valsi-seltau"></a>seltau

x1 is the modifying part of binary metaphor x2 with modified part/modificand x3 giving meaning x4 in usage/instance x5

<a id="valsi-seltihi"></a>selti'i

x1 is a suggestion made by x2 to audience x3

<a id="valsi-seltihifla"></a>selti'ifla

f1\=s2 is a bill specifying f2 (state/event) for community f3 under conditions f4, proposed/drafted by s1.

<a id="valsi-semau"></a>semausemau

zmadu modal, 2nd place (relative!) more than ...; usually a sumti modifier.

<a id="valsi-semeha"></a>seme'asemeha

mleca modal, 2nd place (relative!) less than ...; usually a sumti modifier.

<a id="valsi-semto"></a>semtosemto

x1 reflects Semitic \[metaphor: Middle-Eastern\] language/culture/nationality in aspect x2.

<a id="valsi-semuhibo"></a>semu'ibo

that is the motive for the event ...

<a id="valsi-senva"></a>senvasenva

x1 dreams about/that x2 (fact/idea/event/state); x2 is a dream/reverie of x1.

<a id="valsi-sepiho"></a>sepi'osepiho

pilno modal, 2nd place (instrumental) tool/machine/apparatus/acting entity; using (tool) ...

<a id="valsi-seriha"></a>seri'aseriha

rinka modal, 2nd place (phys./mental) causal therefore ...

<a id="valsi-serti"></a>sertiserti

x1 are stairs/stairway/steps for climbing structure x2 with steps x3.

<a id="valsi-sfofa"></a>sfofasfofa

x1 is a sofa/couch (noun).

<a id="valsi-si"></a>si

erase the last Lojban word, treating non-Lojban text as a single word.

.au mi citka le pa plise si perli — I'd like to eat an apple, no, pear!

<a id="valsi-siclu"></a>siclusiclu

x1 \[sound source\] whistles/makes whistling sound/note/tone/melody x2.

<a id="valsi-sidju"></a>sidjusidju

x1 helps/assists/aids object/person x2 do/achieve/maintain event/activity x3.

<a id="valsi-siha"></a>si'a

discursive: similarly.

<a id="valsi-sihe"></a>si'e

convert number to portion selbri; x1 is an (n)th portion of mass/totality x2; (cf. gunma).

<a id="valsi-siho"></a>si'o

abstractor: idea/concept abstractor; x1 is x2's concept of \[bridi\].

<a id="valsi-simlu"></a>simlusimlu

x1 seems/appears to have property(ies) x2 to observer x3 under conditions x4.

<a id="valsi-simsa"></a>simsasimsa

x1 is similar/parallel to x2 in property/quantity x3 (ka/ni); x1 looks/appears like x2.

le skapi be ra pu simsa le snime le ka blabi — Her skin was white as snow.

mi simsa le'e cipni le ka zifre — I am free as a bird.

<a id="valsi-simxu"></a>simxusimxu

x1 (set) has members who mutually/reciprocally x2 (event \[x1 should be reflexive in 1+ sumti\]).

<a id="valsi-since"></a>sincesince

x1 is a snake/serpent of species/breed x2.

<a id="valsi-sinso"></a>sinsosinso

x1 is the trigonometric sine of angle/arcsine x2.

<a id="valsi-sinxa"></a>sinxasinxa

x1 is a sign/symbol/signal representing/referring/signifying/meaning x2 to observer x3.

<a id="valsi-sipna"></a>sipnasipna

x1 is asleep (adjective); x1 sleeps/is sleeping.

<a id="valsi-sirji"></a>sirjisirji

x1 is straight/direct/line segment/interval between x2 and x3; (adjective:) x1 is linear.

<a id="valsi-sirxo"></a>sirxosirxo

x1 reflects Syrian culture/nationality in aspect x2.

<a id="valsi-sisti"></a>sistisisti

x1 \[agent\] ceases/stops/halts/ends activity/process/state x2 \[not necessarily completing it\].

<a id="valsi-skari"></a>skariskari

x1 is/appears to be of color/hue x2 as perceived/seen by x3 under conditions x4.

<a id="valsi-skicu"></a>skicuskicu

x1 tells about/describes x2 (object/event/state) to audience x3 with description x4 (property).

<a id="valsi-skoto"></a>skotoskoto

x1 reflects Gaelic/Scottish culture/nationality/language in aspect x2.

<a id="valsi-slabu"></a>slabuslabu

x1 is old/familiar/well-known to observer x2 in feature x3 (ka) by standard x4.

<a id="valsi-slaka"></a>slakaslaka

x1 is a syllable in language x2.

<a id="valsi-sligu"></a>sligusligu

x1 is solid, of composition/material including x2, under conditions x3.

<a id="valsi-slovo"></a>slovoslovo

x1 reflects Slavic language/culture/ethos in aspect x2.

<a id="valsi-smacu"></a>smacusmacu

x1 is a mouse of species/breed x2.

<a id="valsi-smudukti"></a>smudukti

d1 and d2\=s2 are antonyms of each other.

<a id="valsi-smuni"></a>smunismuni

x1 is a meaning/interpretation of x2 recognized/seen/accepted by x3.

<a id="valsi-snada"></a>snadasnada

x1 \[agent\] succeeds in/achieves/completes/accomplishes x2 as a result of effort/attempt/try x3.

<a id="valsi-softo"></a>softosofto

x1 reflects Russian empire/USSR/ex-USSR (Soviet\]/CIS culture/nationality in aspect x2.

<a id="valsi-soha"></a>so'a

digit/number: almost all (digit/number).

<a id="valsi-sohe"></a>so'e

digit/number: most.

<a id="valsi-sohi"></a>so'i

digit/number: many.

<a id="valsi-sohimei"></a>so'imei

quantified selbri: convert many to cardinal; x1 is a set with many members x2 of total set x3.

<a id="valsi-soho"></a>so'o

digit/number: several.

<a id="valsi-sohu"></a>so'u

digit/number: few.

<a id="valsi-soi"></a>soi

discursive: reciprocal sumti marker; indicates a reciprocal relationship between sumti.

<a id="valsi-solji"></a>soljisolji

x1 is a quantity of/contains/is made of gold (Au); \[metaphor: valuable, heavy, non-reactive\].

<a id="valsi-solri"></a>solrisolri

x1 is the sun of home planet x2 (default Earth) of race x3; (adjective:) x1 is solar.

<a id="valsi-solxrula"></a>solxrula

x1 is a sunflower of species/variety x2.

<a id="valsi-sonci"></a>soncisonci

x1 is a soldier/warrior/fighter of army x2.

<a id="valsi-sovda"></a>sovdasovda

x1 is an egg/ovum/sperm/pollen/gamete of/from organism \[mother/father\] x2.

<a id="valsi-spageti"></a>spageti

x1 - is spaghetti made out of/containing x2.

<a id="valsi-spaji"></a>spajispaji

x1 (event/action abstract) surprises/startles/is unexpected \[and generally sudden\] to x2.

<a id="valsi-spano"></a>spanospano

x1 reflects Spanish-speaking culture/nationality/language in aspect x2.

<a id="valsi-spati"></a>spatispati

x1 is a plant/herb/greenery of species/strain/cultivar x2.

<a id="valsi-spuda"></a>spudaspuda

x1 answers/replies to/responds to person/object/event/situation/stimulus x2 with response x3.

<a id="valsi-spusku"></a>spusku

x1 gives reply/answer/responds with x2 (sedu'u/text/lu'e concept) to x3 via expressive medium x4, about subject x5.

<a id="valsi-sraji"></a>srajisraji

x1 is vertical/upright/erect/plumb/oriented straight up and down in reference frame/gravity x2.

<a id="valsi-sraku"></a>srakusraku

x1 \[abrasive/cutting/scratching object/implement\] scratches/\[carves\]/erodes/cuts \[into\] x2.

<a id="valsi-sralo"></a>sralosralo

x1 reflects Australian culture/nationality/geography/dialect in aspect x2.

<a id="valsi-srana"></a>sranasrana

x1 pertains to/is germane/relevant to/concerns/is related/associated with/is about x2.

do .e'o ciska le srana be le se lifri be do — Please write about your experience.

xu le nu do litru cu srana le jibri be do — Is your journey related to your job?

<a id="valsi-srito"></a>sritosrito

x1 reflects Sanskrit language/Sanskritic/Vedic culture/nationality in aspect x2.

<a id="valsi-sruri"></a>srurisruri

x1 encircles/encloses/is surrounding x2 in direction(s)/dimension(s)/plane x3.

<a id="valsi-stali"></a>stalistali

x1 remains/stays at/abides/lasts with x2.

<a id="valsi-steci"></a>stecisteci

x1 (ka) is specific/particular/specialized/\[special\]/a defining property of x2 among x3 (set).

<a id="valsi-stedu"></a>stedustedu

x1 is a/the head \[body-part\] of x2; \[metaphor: uppermost portion\].

<a id="valsi-stela"></a>stelastela

x1 is a lock/seal of/on/for sealing x2 with/by locking mechanism x3.

<a id="valsi-stero"></a>sterostero

x1 is x2 steradian(s) \[metric unit\] in solid angle (default is 1) by standard x3.

<a id="valsi-stidi"></a>stidistidi

x1 (agent) suggests/proposes idea/action x2 to audience x3; x1 (event) inspires x2 in/among x3.

<a id="valsi-stura"></a>sturastura

x1 is a structure/arrangement/organization of x2 \[set/system/complexity\].

<a id="valsi-stuzi"></a>stuzistuzi

x1 is an inherent/inalienable site/place/position/situation/spot/location of x2 (object/event).

<a id="valsi-su"></a>su

erase to start of discourse or text; drop subject or start over.

<a id="valsi-sudga"></a>sudgasudga

x1 is dry of liquid x2; (adjective:) x1 is arid.

<a id="valsi-sudysrasu"></a>sudysrasu

x1 is hay of species x2

<a id="valsi-suha"></a>su'a

evidential: I generalize - I particularize; discursive: abstractly - concretely.

<a id="valsi-suhanai"></a>su'anai

evidential: I generalize - I particularize; discursive: abstractly - concretely.

<a id="valsi-suhe"></a>su'e

digit/number: at most (all); no more than.

<a id="valsi-suhi"></a>su'i

n-ary mathematical operator: plus; addition operator; \[(((a + b) + c) + ...)\].

<a id="valsi-suho"></a>su'o

digit/number: at least (some); no less than.

su'o ci prenu pu cliva le dinju — At least three people left the building.

<a id="valsi-suhoroi"></a>su'oroi

at least once ...

<a id="valsi-suhu"></a>su'u

abstractor: generalized abstractor (how); x1 is \[bridi\] as a non-specific abstraction of type x2.

<a id="valsi-suksa"></a>suksasuksa

x1 (event/state) is sudden/sharply changes at stage/point x2 in process/property/function x3.

<a id="valsi-sumti"></a>sumtisumti

x1 is a/the argument of predicate/function x2 filling place x3 (kind/number).

<a id="valsi-sunsicyjudri"></a>sunsicyjudri

j1 is the longitude/right ascension of j2 in system j3

<a id="valsi-sutra"></a>sutrasutra

x1 is fast/swift/quick/hastes/rapid at doing/being/bringing about x2 (event/state).

<a id="valsi-sy"></a>sy.

letteral for s.

<a id="valsi-ta"></a>ta

pro-sumti: that there; nearby demonstrative it; indicated thing/place near listener.

<a id="valsi-tadji"></a>tadjitadji

x1 \[process\] is a method/technique/approach/means for doing x2 (event) under conditions x3.

<a id="valsi-tagji"></a>tagjitagji

x1 is snug/tight on x2 in dimension/direction x3 at locus x4.

<a id="valsi-tahe"></a>ta'e

tense interval modifier: habitually; subjective tense/modal; defaults as time tense.

<a id="valsi-taheku"></a>ta'eku

habitually

<a id="valsi-tahi"></a>ta'itahi

tadji modal, 1st place (in manner 3) methodically; by method ...

<a id="valsi-taho"></a>ta'o

discursive: by the way - returning to main point.

<a id="valsi-tahonai"></a>ta'onai

discursive: by the way - returning to main point.

<a id="valsi-tahu"></a>ta'u

discursive: expanding the tanru - making a tanru.

<a id="valsi-tahunai"></a>ta'unai

discursive: making a tanru - expanding the tanru.

<a id="valsi-tai"></a>taitai

tamsmi modal, 1st place (like)/(in manner 2) resembling ...; sharing ideal form ...

<a id="valsi-tamduhi"></a>tamdu'i

d1 is/are geometrically similar/has the same shape as d2.

<a id="valsi-tamsmi"></a>tamsmi

x1 has form x2, similar in form to x3 in property/quality x4.

<a id="valsi-tanjo"></a>tanjotanjo

x1 is the trigonometric tangent of angle/arctangent x2.

<a id="valsi-tanru"></a>tanrutanru

x1 is a binary metaphor formed with x2 modifying x3, giving meaning x4 in usage/instance x5.

<a id="valsi-tarmi"></a>tarmitarmi

x1 \[ideal\] is the conceptual shape/form of object/abstraction/manifestation x2 (object/abstract).

<a id="valsi-tatpi"></a>tatpitatpi

x1 is tired/fatigued by effort/situation x2 (event); x1 needs/wants rest.

<a id="valsi-tau"></a>tau

2-word letteral/shift: change case for next letteral only.

<a id="valsi-tavla"></a>tavlatavla

x1 talks/speaks to x2 about subject x3 in language x4.

ko smaji ca le nu mi tavla la .alis. fo la .lojban. fi le nu prami — Keep silence when I'm talking to Alice in Lojban about love.

<a id="valsi-tcadu"></a>tcadutcadu

x1 is a town/city of metropolitan area x2, in political unit x3, serving hinterland/region x4.

<a id="valsi-tcidu"></a>tcidutcidu

x1 \[agent\] reads x2 \[text\] from surface/document/reading material x3; x1 is a reader.

mi mo'u tcidu le se ciska le bitmu — I have read what is written on the wall.

<a id="valsi-tcika"></a>tcikatcika

x1 \[hours, minutes, seconds\] is the time/hour of state/event x2 on day x3 at location x4.

<a id="valsi-tcita"></a>tcitatcita

x1 is a label/tag of x2 showing information x3.

<a id="valsi-te"></a>te

3rd conversion; switch 1st/3rd places.

mi pu te vecnu le karce le pendo be mi .i va'i le pendo be mi pu vecnu le karce mi — I bought a car from my friend. In other words, my friend sold a car to me.

<a id="valsi-tecihe"></a>teci'etecihe

ciste modal, 3rd place of system components ...

<a id="valsi-teha"></a>te'a

binary mathematical operator: to the power; exponential; \[a to the b power\].

<a id="valsi-teho"></a>te'o

digit/number: exponential e (approx 2.71828...).

<a id="valsi-tehu"></a>te'u

elidable terminator: end conversion between non-mex and mex; usually elidable.

<a id="valsi-tei"></a>tei

composite letteral follows; used for multi-character letterals.

<a id="valsi-tekaha"></a>teka'atekaha

klama modal, 3rd place with origin ...

<a id="valsi-terbiha"></a>terbi'a

x3\=b1 is ill/sick/diseased with symptoms x2\=b2 from disease x1\=b3.

<a id="valsi-terdi"></a>terditerdi

x1 is the Earth/the home planet of race x2; (adjective:) x1 is terrestrial/earthbound.

<a id="valsi-terguhi"></a>tergu'i

x1 is a light source which illuminates x2 with light x3.

<a id="valsi-terkavbu"></a>terkavbu

x1 is a trap/restraint with x2 being captured/restrained by x3 (object/event).

<a id="valsi-terpa"></a>terpaterpa

x1 fears x2; x1 is afraid/scared/frightened by/fearful of x2 (event/tu'a object).

<a id="valsi-tertau"></a>tertau

x1 is the modified part/modificand of binary metaphor x2 with modifying part x3, giving meaning x4 in usage/instance x5

<a id="valsi-terto"></a>tertoterto

x1 is a trillion \[1012\] of x2 in dimension/aspect x3 (default is units).

<a id="valsi-tezuhe"></a>tezu'etezuhe

zukte modal, 3rd place purposefully; (as an action) with goal ...

<a id="valsi-ti"></a>ti

pro-sumti: this here; immediate demonstrative it; indicated thing/place near speaker.

<a id="valsi-tihe"></a>ti'e

evidential: I hear (hearsay).

<a id="valsi-tiho"></a>ti'o

mathematical expression (mex) operator precedence (discursive).

<a id="valsi-tihotci"></a>ti'otci

t1\=c2 is a shade/blind for blocking light coming from/through c3

<a id="valsi-tinjuhi"></a>tinju'i

t1\=j1 listens to/pays attention to sound t2\=j2 with ambient background t3.

<a id="valsi-tirna"></a>tirnatirna

x1 hears x2 against background/noise x3; x2 is audible; (adjective:) x1 is aural.

<a id="valsi-tirxu"></a>tirxutirxu

x1 is a tiger/leopard/jaguar/\[tigress\] of species/breed x2 with coat markings x3.

<a id="valsi-tisna"></a>tisnatisna

x1 (object) fills/becomes stuffed \[up\]/inflates/blows up with material x2; x2 pours into x1.

<a id="valsi-to"></a>to

left parenthesis; start of parenthetical note which must be grammatical Lojban text.

lei verba to lei rirni pu zvati le zarci toi pu klama le bartu — The children (the parents were at the store) went outside.

<a id="valsi-toha"></a>to'a

lower-case letteral shift.

<a id="valsi-tohe"></a>to'e

polar opposite scalar negator.

<a id="valsi-tohi"></a>to'i

open editorial unquote (within a quote); contains grammatical text; mark with editorial insert.

<a id="valsi-tohisaha"></a>to'isa'a

remarks within {to'isa'a} ... {toi} inside quotations are implicitly by someone else (other than the speaker of the quotation), perhaps an editor

<a id="valsi-toho"></a>to'o

location tense relation/direction; departing from/directly away from ...

<a id="valsi-tohu"></a>to'u

discursive: in brief - in detail.

<a id="valsi-toi"></a>toi

elidable terminator: right parenthesis/end unquote; seldom elidable except at end of text.

<a id="valsi-tolcanci"></a>tolcanci

c1 materializes/suddenly appears at location c2 according to senses/sensor c3.

<a id="valsi-tolmle"></a>tolmle

x1 is ugly to x2 in aspect x3 (ka) by aesthetic standard x4.

<a id="valsi-tolpuhi"></a>tolpu'i

p1 picks-up, picks up p2 from surface p3

<a id="valsi-tolvri"></a>tolvri

x1 is a coward in activity x2 (event) by standard x3.

<a id="valsi-tordu"></a>tordutordu

x1 is short in dimension/direction x2 (default longest dimension) by measurement standard x3.

<a id="valsi-traji"></a>trajitraji

x1 is superlative in property x2 (ka), the x3 extreme (ka; default ka zmadu) among set/range x4.

<a id="valsi-tricu"></a>tricutricu

x1 is a tree of species/cultivar x2.

<a id="valsi-trixe"></a>trixetrixe

x1 is posterior/behind/back/in the rear of x2 which faces/in-frame-of-reference x3.

<a id="valsi-troci"></a>trocitroci

x1 tries/attempts/makes an effort to do/attain x2 (event/state/property) by actions/method x3.

mi ba troci le ka cpare le tricu — I will try to climb the tree.

<a id="valsi-tsali"></a>tsalitsali

x1 is strong/powerful/\[tough\] in property/quality x2 (ka) by standard x3.

<a id="valsi-tu"></a>tu

pro-sumti: that yonder; distant demonstrative it; indicated thing far from speaker&listener.

<a id="valsi-tubnu"></a>tubnutubnu

x1 is a length of tubing/pipe/hollow cylinder \[shape/form\] of material x2, hollow of material x3.

<a id="valsi-tugni"></a>tugnitugni

x1 \[person\] agrees with person(s)/position/side x2 that x3 (du'u) is true about matter x4.

<a id="valsi-tuha"></a>tu'a

extracts a concrete sumti from an unspecified abstraction; equivalent to le nu/su'u \[sumti\] co'e.

mi djica tu'a le pa plise — I want an apple. I want something to happen with an apple (maybe, I want to eat it).

<a id="valsi-tuhe"></a>tu'e

start of multiple utterance scope; used for logical/non-logical/ordinal joining of sentences.

<a id="valsi-tuho"></a>tu'o

null operand (used in unary mekso operations).

<a id="valsi-tuhu"></a>tu'u

elidable terminator: end multiple utterance scope; seldom elidable.

<a id="valsi-tumla"></a>tumlatumla

x1 is a parcel/expanse of land at location x2; x1 is terrain.

<a id="valsi-tunta"></a>tuntatunta

x1 (object, usually pointed) pokes/jabs/stabs/prods x2 (experiencer).

<a id="valsi-tuple"></a>tupletuple

x1 is a/the leg \[body-part\] of x2; \[metaphor: supporting branch\].

<a id="valsi-ty"></a>ty.

letteral for t.

<a id="valsi-u"></a>.u

logical connective: sumti afterthought whether-or-not.

<a id="valsi-ua"></a>.ua

attitudinal: discovery - confusion/searching.

<a id="valsi-uanai"></a>.uanai

attitudinal: discovery - confusion/searching.

<a id="valsi-ubu"></a>.ubu

letteral for u.

<a id="valsi-ue"></a>.ue

attitudinal: surprise - not really surprised - expectation.

<a id="valsi-uesai"></a>.uesai

attitudinal: "Wow! Wow!"; strong surprise

<a id="valsi-uha"></a>.u'a

attitudinal: gain - loss.

<a id="valsi-uhe"></a>.u'e

attitudinal: wonder - commonplace.

<a id="valsi-uho"></a>.u'o

attitudinal: courage - timidity - cowardice.

<a id="valsi-uhu"></a>.u'u

attitudinal: repentance - lack of regret - innocence.

<a id="valsi-uhunai"></a>.u'unai

attitudinal: repentance - lack of regret - innocence.

<a id="valsi-ui"></a>.ui

attitudinal: happiness - unhappiness.

<a id="valsi-uinai"></a>.uinai

attitudinal: happiness - unhappiness.

<a id="valsi-uisai"></a>.uisai

attitudinal: "Yay!"; strong happiness

<a id="valsi-uisaidai"></a>.uisaidai

attitudinal: empathetic description of someone else's strong happiness

<a id="valsi-uo"></a>.uo

attitudinal: completion - incompleteness.

<a id="valsi-uu"></a>.uu

attitudinal: pity - cruelty.

<a id="valsi-va"></a>va

location tense distance: near to ... ; there at ...; a medium/small distance from ...

<a id="valsi-vacri"></a>vacrivacri

x1 is a quantity of air/normally-gaseous atmosphere of planet x2, of composition including x3.

<a id="valsi-vaha"></a>va'a

unary mathematical operator: additive inverse; \[- a\].

<a id="valsi-vahe"></a>va'e

convert number to scalar selbri; x1 is at (n)th position on scale x2.

mi pu so'u va'e le ka pencu — I barely touched it.

<a id="valsi-vahi"></a>va'i

discursive: in other words - in the same words.

<a id="valsi-vahinai"></a>va'inai

discursive: in other words - in the same words.

<a id="valsi-vaho"></a>va'ovaho

vanbi modal, 1st place (conditions 1) under conditions ...; in environment ...

<a id="valsi-vahu"></a>va'uvahu

xamgu modal, 1st place beneficiary case tag complement benefiting from ...

<a id="valsi-vajni"></a>vajnivajni

x1 (object/event) is important/significant to x2 (person/event) in aspect/for reason x3 (nu/ka).

<a id="valsi-valsi"></a>valsivalsi

x1 is a word meaning/causing x2 in language x3; (adjective: x1 is lexical/verbal).

<a id="valsi-vanci"></a>vancivanci

x1 is an evening \[from end-of-work until sleep typical for locale\] of day x2 at location x3.

<a id="valsi-vasru"></a>vasruvasru

x1 contains/holds/encloses/includes contents x2 within; x1 is a vessel containing x2.

<a id="valsi-vau"></a>vau

elidable: end of sumti in simple bridi; in compound bridi, separates common trailing sumti.

mi jinga vau .ui — I won, yay!

<a id="valsi-ve"></a>ve

4th conversion; switch 1st/4th places.

<a id="valsi-vecnu"></a>vecnuvecnu

x1 \[seller\] sells/vends x2 \[goods/service/commodity\] to buyer x3 for amount/cost/expense x4.

<a id="valsi-veha"></a>ve'a

location tense interval: a small/medium region of space.

<a id="valsi-vehe"></a>ve'e

location tense interval: the whole of space.

<a id="valsi-veho"></a>ve'o

right mathematical bracket.

<a id="valsi-vei"></a>vei

left mathematical bracket.

<a id="valsi-vekaha"></a>veka'avekaha

klama modal, 4th place via route ...

<a id="valsi-veljvo"></a>veljvo

x1 is a metaphor \[of affix compound\] with meaning \[of affix compound\] x2 with argument \[of affix compound\] x3 with affix compound x4; x1 is the tanru/metaphor construct of complex word/affix compound/lujvo x4

<a id="valsi-vemau"></a>vemauvemau

zmadu modal, 4th place (relative!) more than/exceeding by amount ...

<a id="valsi-vemeha"></a>veme'avemeha

mleca modal, 4th place (relative!) less than by amount ...

<a id="valsi-vensa"></a>vensavensa

x1 is spring/springtime \[warming season\] of year x2 at location x3; (adjective:) x1 is vernal.

<a id="valsi-verba"></a>verbaverba

x1 is a child/kid/juvenile \[a young person\] of age x2, immature by standard x3.

<a id="valsi-vi"></a>vi

location tense distance: here at ... ; at or a very short/tiny distance from ...

<a id="valsi-viha"></a>vi'a

dimensionality of space interval tense: 2-space interval; throughout an area.

<a id="valsi-vihe"></a>vi'e

dimensionality of space interval tense: 4-space interval; throughout a spacetime.

<a id="valsi-vihi"></a>vi'i

dimensionality of space interval tense: 1-space interval; along a line.

<a id="valsi-vihu"></a>vi'u

dimensionality of space interval tense: 3-space interval; throughout a space.

<a id="valsi-vikmi"></a>vikmivikmi

x1 \[body\] excretes waste x2 from source x3 via means/route x4.

<a id="valsi-vindu"></a>vinduvindu

x1 is poisonous/venomous/toxic/a toxin to x2.

<a id="valsi-vinji"></a>vinjivinji

x1 is an airplane/aircraft \[flying vehicle\] for carrying passengers/cargo x2, propelled by x3.

<a id="valsi-virnu"></a>virnuvirnu

x1 is brave/valiant/courageous in activity x2 (event) by standard x3.

<a id="valsi-viska"></a>viskaviska

x1 sees/views/perceives visually x2 under conditions x3.

<a id="valsi-vlipa"></a>vlipavlipa

x1 has the power to bring about x2 under conditions x3; x1 is powerful in aspect x2 under x3.

le mamta be mi ku po'o cu vlipa le nu mi cliva — Only my mother has power to make me leave.

<a id="valsi-vo"></a>vo

digit/number: 4 (digit) \[four\].

<a id="valsi-vofli"></a>voflivofli

x1 flies \[in air/atmosphere\] using lifting/propulsion means x2.

<a id="valsi-voha"></a>vo'a

pro-sumti: repeats 1st place of main bridi of this sentence.

<a id="valsi-vohe"></a>vo'e

pro-sumti: repeats 2nd place of main bridi of this sentence.

<a id="valsi-vohi"></a>vo'i

pro-sumti: repeats 3rd place of main bridi of this sentence.

<a id="valsi-voho"></a>vo'o

pro-sumti: repeats 4th place of main bridi of this sentence.

<a id="valsi-vohu"></a>vo'u

pro-sumti: repeats 5th place of main bridi of this sentence.

<a id="valsi-voi"></a>voi

non-veridical restrictive clause used to form complicated le-like descriptions using "ke'a".

<a id="valsi-vorme"></a>vormevorme

x1 is a doorway/gateway/access way between x2 and x3 of structure x4.

<a id="valsi-vreji"></a>vrejivreji

x1 is a record of x2 (data/facts/du'u) about x3 (object/event) preserved in medium x4.

<a id="valsi-vrusi"></a>vrusivrusi

x1 (ka) is a taste/flavor of/emitted by x2; x2 tastes of/like x1.

<a id="valsi-vu"></a>vu

location tense distance: far from ... ; yonder at ... ; a long distance from ...

<a id="valsi-vuhe"></a>vu'e

attitudinal modifier: virtue - sin.

<a id="valsi-vuhi"></a>vu'i

sumti qualifier: the sequence made from set or composed of elements/components; order is vague.

<a id="valsi-vuho"></a>vu'o

joins relative clause/phrase to complete complex or logically connected sumti in afterthought.

<a id="valsi-vuhu"></a>vu'u

n-ary mathematical operator: minus; subtraction operator; \[(((a - b) - c) - ...)\].

<a id="valsi-vukro"></a>vukrovukro

x1 reflects Ukrainian language/culture/nationality in aspect x2.

<a id="valsi-vy"></a>vy.

letteral for v.

<a id="valsi-xabju"></a>xabjuxabju

x1 dwells/lives/resides/abides at/inhabits/is a resident of location/habitat/nest/home/abode x2.

<a id="valsi-xagmau"></a>xagmau

xa1\=z1 is better than z2 for xa2 by standard xa3, by amount z4.

<a id="valsi-xagrai"></a>xagrai

t1\=x1 is the best among set/range t4 for x2 by standard x3.

<a id="valsi-xajmi"></a>xajmixajmi

x1 is funny/comical to x2 in property/aspect x3 (nu/ka); x3 is what is funny about x1 to x2.

<a id="valsi-xalbo"></a>xalboxalbo

x1 uses levity/is non-serious/frivolous about x2 (abstraction).

<a id="valsi-xamgu"></a>xamguxamgu

x1 (object/event) is good/beneficial/nice/\[acceptable\] for x2 by standard x3.

le'e plise cu xamgu le nu kanro .i ji'a le'e plise cu kukte — Apples are good for your health. And, in addition, they taste great.

<a id="valsi-xampo"></a>xampoxampo

x1 is x2 ampere(s) \[metric unit\] in current (default is 1) by standard x3.

<a id="valsi-xamsi"></a>xamsixamsi

x1 is a sea/ocean/gulf/\[atmosphere\] of planet x2, of fluid x3; (adjective:) x1 is marine.

<a id="valsi-xance"></a>xancexance

x1 is a/the hand \[body-part\] of x2; \[metaphor: manipulating tool, waldo\].

<a id="valsi-xanka"></a>xankaxanka

x1 is nervous/anxious about x2 (abstraction) under conditions x3.

<a id="valsi-xanri"></a>xanrixanri

x1 \[concept\] exists in the imagination of/is imagined by/is imaginary to x2.

<a id="valsi-xanto"></a>xantoxanto

x1 is an elephant of species/breed x2.

<a id="valsi-xarci"></a>xarcixarci

x1 is a weapon/arms for use against x2 by x3.

<a id="valsi-xatsi"></a>xatsixatsi

x1 is 10\-18 of x2 in dimension/aspect x3 (default is units).

<a id="valsi-xazdo"></a>xazdoxazdo

x1 reflects Asiatic culture/nationality/geography in aspect x2.

<a id="valsi-xe"></a>xe

5th conversion; switch 1st/5th places.

<a id="valsi-xebro"></a>xebroxebro

x1 reflects Hebrew/Jewish/Israeli culture/nationality/language in aspect x2.

<a id="valsi-xecto"></a>xectoxecto

x1 is a hundred \[100; 102\] of x2 in dimension/aspect x3 (default is units).

<a id="valsi-xekaha"></a>xeka'axekaha

klama modal, 5th place by transport mode ...

<a id="valsi-xekri"></a>xekrixekri

x1 is black/extremely dark-colored \[color adjective\].

<a id="valsi-xelso"></a>xelsoxelso

x1 reflects Greek/Hellenic culture/nationality/language in aspect x2.

<a id="valsi-xexso"></a>xexsoxexso

x1 is 1018 of x2 in dimension/aspect x3 (default is units).

<a id="valsi-xi"></a>xi

subscript; attaches a number of letteral string following as a subscript onto grammar structures.

<a id="valsi-xindo"></a>xindoxindo

x1 reflects Hindi language/culture/religion in aspect x2.

<a id="valsi-xirnzebra"></a>xirnzebra

x1 is a mountain zebra (scientific term: “Equus zebra”).

<a id="valsi-xispo"></a>xispoxispo

x1 reflects Hispano-American culture/nationalities in aspect x2.

<a id="valsi-xo"></a>xo

digit/number: number/digit/lerfu question.

<a id="valsi-xokau"></a>xokau

number/digit/lerfu indirect question; "how many" in indirect questions like in "I know HOW MANY of them came"

<a id="valsi-xrabo"></a>xraboxrabo

x1 reflects Arabic-speaking culture/nationality in aspect x2.

<a id="valsi-xrani"></a>xranixrani

x1 (event) injures/harms/damages victim x2 in property x3 (ka) resulting in injury x4 (state).

<a id="valsi-xriso"></a>xrisoxriso

x1 pertains to the Christian religion/culture/nationality in aspect x2.

<a id="valsi-xruki"></a>xrukixruki

x1 is a turkey \[food/bird\] of species/breed x2.

<a id="valsi-xrula"></a>xrulaxrula

x1 is a/the flower/blossom/bloom \[body-part\] of plant/species x2; (adjective:) x1 is floral.

<a id="valsi-xu"></a>xu

discursive: true-false question.

xu do pu djuno — Did you know?

<a id="valsi-xunblabi"></a>xunblabi

b1\=x1 is pink.

<a id="valsi-xunre"></a>xunrexunre

x1 is red/crimson/ruddy \[color adjective\].

<a id="valsi-xurdo"></a>xurdoxurdo

x1 reflects Urdu language/culture/nationality in aspect x2.

<a id="valsi-xy"></a>xy.

letteral for x.

<a id="valsi-y"></a>.y.

hesitation noise; maintains the floor while speaker decides what to say next.

<a id="valsi-ybu"></a>.ybu

letteral for y.

<a id="valsi-yhy"></a>.y'y.

letteral for '.

<a id="valsi-za"></a>za

time tense distance: medium distance in time.

<a id="valsi-zabna"></a>zabnazabna

x1 is favorable/great/superb/fabulous/dandy/outstanding/swell/admirable/nice/commendable/delightful/desirable/enjoyable/laudable/likable/lovable/wonderful/praiseworthy/high-quality/cool in property x2 by standard x3; x1 rocks in aspect x2 according to x3

xu zabna fa le nu da'i mi skicu le pu zi se zukte be mi la .alis. — I wonder if I should tell Alice what I just did.

<a id="valsi-zaha"></a>za'a

evidential: I observe.

.oi nai za'a melbi tcima — Oh, what a nice weather.

za'a cladu bu'u le bartu — I can hear the loud sound outside.

ja'o carmi carvi — So it must be raining heavily.

<a id="valsi-zahe"></a>za'e

forethought nonce-word indicator; indicates next word is nonce-creation and may be nonstandard.

<a id="valsi-zahi"></a>za'i

abstractor: state (event) abstractor; x1 is continuous state of \[bridi\] being true.

<a id="valsi-zaho"></a>za'o

interval event contour: continuing too long after natural end of ...; superfective | ---->.

<a id="valsi-zahu"></a>za'u

digit/number: greater than.

le za'u sazri ca denpa — The drivers wait.

<a id="valsi-zahurehu"></a>za'ure'u

again; in addition to the first time; for the "more"-th time

<a id="valsi-zai"></a>zai

2-word letteral/shift: alternate alphabet selector follows.

<a id="valsi-zarci"></a>zarcizarci

x1 is a market/store/exchange/shop(s) selling/trading (for) x2, operated by/with participants x3.

<a id="valsi-zbasu"></a>zbasuzbasu

x1 makes/assembles/builds/manufactures/creates x2 out of materials/parts/components x3.

<a id="valsi-zdani"></a>zdanizdani

x1 is a nest/house/lair/den/\[home\] of/for x2.

<a id="valsi-zeha"></a>ze'a

time tense interval: a medium length of time.

<a id="valsi-zehe"></a>ze'e

time tense interval: the whole of time.

<a id="valsi-zehi"></a>ze'i

time tense interval: an instantaneous/tiny/short amount of time.

<a id="valsi-zeho"></a>ze'o

location tense relation/direction; beyond/outward/receding from ...

<a id="valsi-zei"></a>zei

joins preceding and following words into a lujvo.

<a id="valsi-zenba"></a>zenbazenba

x1 (experiencer) increases/is incremented/augmented in property/quantity x2 by amount x3.

<a id="valsi-zepti"></a>zeptizepti

x1 is 10\-21 of x2 in dimension/aspect x3 (default is units).

<a id="valsi-zerleha"></a>zerle'a

l1 steals l2 from l3, which is a crime according to z2.

<a id="valsi-zernerkla"></a>zernerkla

x1 trespasses (illegally enters) into x2, which is a crime according to x3

<a id="valsi-zetro"></a>zetrozetro

x1 is 1021 of x2 in dimension/aspect x3 (default is units).

<a id="valsi-zgana"></a>zganazgana

x1 observes/\[notices\]/watches/beholds x2 using senses/means x3 under conditions x4.

<a id="valsi-zi"></a>zi

time tense distance: instantaneous-to-short distance in time.

<a id="valsi-zifre"></a>zifrezifre

x1 is free/at liberty to do/be x2 (event/state) under conditions x3.

<a id="valsi-zihe"></a>zi'e

joins relative clauses which apply to the same sumti.

<a id="valsi-ziho"></a>zi'o

pro-sumti: fills a sumti place, deleting it from selbri place structure;changes selbri semantics.

<a id="valsi-zmadu"></a>zmaduzmadu

x1 exceeds/is more than x2 in property/quantity x3 (ka/ni) by amount/excess x4.

<a id="valsi-zo"></a>zo

quote next word only; quotes a single Lojban word (not a cmavo compound or tanru).

zo rozgu cmene mi — "Rose" is my name.

<a id="valsi-zohe"></a>zo'e

pro-sumti: an elliptical/unspecified value; has some value which makes bridi true.

zo'e carvi — It's raining.

mi ca'o tavla zo'e la .lojban. — I'm talking about Lojban.

<a id="valsi-zohi"></a>zo'i

location tense relation/direction; nearer than .../inward/approaching from ...

<a id="valsi-zoho"></a>zo'o

attitudinal modifier: humorously - dully - seriously.

zo'o pei — Are you kidding?

.e'u zo'o renro la .kevin. ti voi kevna — Let's throw Kevin into this hole (kidding ...).

mi kakne le ka plipe fi le ve'i cmana vau zo'o cu'i — I might be able to jump from the hill.

zo'o nai gau do fanza — Seriously, you are annoying.

<a id="valsi-zohu"></a>zo'u

marks end of logical prenex quantifiers/topic identification and start of sentence bridi.

lo'e danlu zo'u mi nelci lo'e mlatu — As for animals, I like cats.

<a id="valsi-zoi"></a>zoi

delimited non-Lojban quotation; the result treated as a block of text.

<a id="valsi-zuha"></a>zu'a

location tense relation/direction; leftwards/to the left of ...

<a id="valsi-zuhe"></a>zu'ezuhe

zukte modal, 1st place (purposed agent) with goal-seeking actor ...

<a id="valsi-zuhi"></a>zu'i

pro-sumti: the typical sumti value for this place in this relationship; affects truth value.

<a id="valsi-zuho"></a>zu'o

abstractor: activity (event) abstractor; x1 is abstract activity of \[bridi\] composed of x2.

<a id="valsi-zuhu"></a>zu'u

discursive: on the one hand - on the other hand.

<a id="valsi-zukte"></a>zuktezukte

x1 is a volitional entity employing means/taking action x2 for purpose/goal x3/to end x3.

<a id="valsi-zuljma"></a>zuljma

j1\=z1 is/are the left foot/feet of j2\=z2.

<a id="valsi-zunle"></a>zunlezunle

x1 is to the left/left-hand side of x2 which faces/in-frame-of-reference x3.

<a id="valsi-zutse"></a>zutsezutse

x1 sits \[assumes sitting position\] on surface x2.

<a id="valsi-zvafahi"></a>zvafa'i

x1\=facki1 finds/locates x2\=zvati1\=facki3 (object) at x3\=zvati2 (event/location)

<a id="valsi-zvati"></a>zvatizvati

x1 (object/event) is at/attending/present at x2 (event/location).

<a id="valsi-zy"></a>zy.

letteral for z.