<a id="credits"></a>1.5. <a id="c1s5"></a>Acknowledgements and credits
----------------------------------------------------------------------

<a id="id-1.2.7.2.1" class="indexterm"></a><a id="id-1.2.7.2.2" class="indexterm"></a><a id="id-1.2.7.2.3" class="indexterm"></a>Although the bulk of this book was written for the Logical Language Group (LLG) by John Cowan, who is represented by the occasional authorial “I” , certain chapters were first written by others and then heavily edited by me to fit into this book.

<a id="id-1.2.7.3.1" class="indexterm"></a><a id="id-1.2.7.3.2" class="indexterm"></a>In particular: [Chapter 2](../chapter-tour) is a fusion of originally separate documents, one by Athelstan, and one by Nora Tansky LeChevalier and Bob LeChevalier; [Chapter 3](../chapter-phonology) and [Chapter 4](../chapter-morphology) were originally written by Bob LeChevalier with contributions by Chuck Barton; [Chapter 12](../chapter-lujvo) was originally written (in much longer form) by Nick Nicholas; the dialogue near the end of [Chapter 13](../chapter-attitudinals) was contributed by Nora Tansky LeChevalier; [Chapter 15](../chapter-negation) and parts of [Chapter 16](../chapter-quantifiers) were originally by Bob LeChevalier. The BNF grammar, which is also in [Chapter 21](../chapter-grammars) , was originally written by me, then rewritten by Clark Nelson, and finally touched up by me again.

<a id="id-1.2.7.4.1" class="indexterm"></a><a id="id-1.2.7.4.2" class="indexterm"></a>The research into natural languages from which parts of [Chapter 5](../chapter-selbri) draw their material was performed by Ivan Derzhanski. LLG acknowledges his kind permission to use the fruits of his research.

<a id="id-1.2.7.5.1" class="indexterm"></a><a id="id-1.2.7.5.2" class="indexterm"></a>The pictures in this book were drawn by Nora Tansky LeChevalier, except for the picture appearing in [Chapter 4](../chapter-morphology) , which is by Sylvia Rutiser Rissell.

The index was made by Nora Tansky LeChevalier.

<a id="id-1.2.7.7.1" class="indexterm"></a><a id="id-1.2.7.7.2" class="indexterm"></a>I would like to thank the following people for their detailed reviews, suggestions, comments, and early detection of my embarrassing errors in Lojban, logic, English, and cross-references: Nick Nicholas, Mark Shoulson, Veijo Vilva, Colin Fine, And Rosta, Jorge Llambias, Iain Alexander, Paulo S. L. M. Barreto, Robert J. Chassell, Gale Cowan, Karen Stein, Ivan Derzhanski, Jim Carter, Irene Gates, Bob LeChevalier, John Parks-Clifford (also known as “pc”), and Nora Tansky LeChevalier.

Nick Nicholas (NSN) would like to thank the following Lojbanists: Mark Shoulson, Veijo Vilva, Colin Fine, And Rosta, and Iain Alexander for their suggestions and comments; John Cowan, for his extensive comments, his exemplary trailblazing of Lojban grammar, and for solving the _manskapi_ dilemma for NSN; Jorge Llambias, for his even more extensive comments, and for forcing NSN to think more than he was inclined to; Bob LeChevalier, for his skeptical overview of the issue, his encouragement, and for scouring all Lojban text his computer has been burdened with for lujvo; Nora Tansky LeChevalier, for writing the program converting old rafsi text to new rafsi text, and sparing NSN from embarrassing errors; and Jim Carter, for his dogged persistence in analyzing lujvo algorithmically, which inspired this research, and for first identifying the three lujvo classes.

<a id="id-1.2.7.9.1" class="indexterm"></a>Of course, the entire Loglan Project owes a considerable debt to James Cooke Brown as the language inventor, and also to several earlier contributors to the development of the language. Especially noteworthy are Doug Landauer, Jeff Prothero, Scott Layson, Jeff Taylor, and Bob McIvor. Final responsibility for the remaining errors and infelicities is solely mine.